As one enters Rome from the Via Ostiensis by the Porta San Paolo, the
first object that meets the eye is a marble pyramid which stands close at hand
on the left.
There are many Egyptian obelisks in Rome—tall, snakelike spires of red
sandstone, mottled with strange writings, which remind us of the pillars of
flame which led the children of Israel through the desert away from the land of
the Pharaohs; but more wonderful than these to look upon is this gaunt,
wedge-shaped pyramid standing here in this Italian city, unshattered amid the
ruins and wrecks of time, looking older than the Eternal City itself, like
terrible impassiveness turned to stone. And so in the Middle Ages men
supposed this to be the sepulchre of Remus, who was slain by his own brother
at the founding of the city, so ancient and mysterious it appears; but we have
now, perhaps unfortunately, more accurate information about it, and know that
it is the tomb of one Caius Cestius, a Roman gentleman of small note, who
died about 30 b.c.
Yet though we cannot care much for the dead man who lies in lonely state
beneath it, and who is only known to the world through his sepulchre, still this
pyramid will be ever dear to the eyes of all English-speaking people, because
at evening its shadows fall on the tomb of one who walks with Spenser, and
Shakespeare, and Byron, and Shelley, and Elizabeth Barrett Browning in the
great procession of the sweet singers of England.
For at its foot there is a green sunny slope, known as the Old Protestant
Cemetery, and on this a common-looking grave, which bears the following
inscription:
This grave contains all that was mortal of a young English poet, who on his
deathbed, in the bitterness of his heart, desired these words to be engraven on
his tombstone: Here lies one whose name was writ in water. February 24,
1821.
And the name of the young English poet is John Keats.
Lord Houghton calls this cemetery ‘one of the most beautiful spots on
which the eye and heart of man can rest,’ and Shelley speaks of it as making
one ‘in love with death, to think that one should be buried in so sweet a place’;
and indeed when I saw the violets and the daisies and the poppies that
overgrow the tomb, I remembered how the dead poet had once told his friend
that he thought the ‘intensest pleasure he had received in life was in watching
the growth of flowers,’ and how another time, after lying a while quite still, he
murmured in some strange prescience of early death, ‘I feel the flowers
growing over me.’
But this time-worn stone and these wildflowers are but poor memorials of
one so great as Keats; most of all, too, in this city of Rome, which pays such
honour to her dead; where popes, and emperors, and saints, and cardinals lie
hidden in ‘porphyry wombs,’ or couched in baths of jasper and chalcedony
and malachite, ablaze with precious stones and metals, and tended with
continual service. For very noble is the site, and worthy of a noble monument;
behind looms the grey pyramid, symbol of the world’s age, and filled with
memories of the sphinx, and the lotus leaf, and the glories of old Nile; in front
is the Monte Testaccio, built, it is said, with the broken fragments of the
vessels in which all the nations of the East and the West brought their tribute
to Rome; and a little distance off, along the slope of the hill under the Aurelian
wall, some tall gaunt cypresses rise, like burnt-out funeral torches, to mark the
spot where Shelley’s heart (that ‘heart of hearts’!) lies in the earth; and, above
all, the soil on which we tread is very Rome!
As I stood beside the mean grave of this divine boy, I thought of him as of
a Priest of Beauty slain before his time; and the vision of Guido’s St. Sebastian
came before my eyes as I saw him at Genoa, a lovely brown boy, with crisp,
clustering hair and red lips, bound by his evil enemies to a tree, and though
pierced by arrows, raising his eyes with divine, impassioned gaze towards the
Eternal Beauty of the opening heavens. And thus my thoughts shaped
themselves to rhyme:
HEU MISERANDE PUER
Rid of the world’s injustice and its pain,
He rests at last beneath God’s veil of blue;
Taken from life while life and love were new
The youngest of the martyrs here is lain,
Fair as Sebastian and as foully slain.
No cypress shades his grave, nor funeral yew,
But red-lipped daisies, violets drenched with dew,
And sleepy poppies, catch the evening rain.
O proudest heart that broke for misery!
O saddest poet that the world hath seen!
O sweetest singer of the English land!
Thy name was writ in water on the sand,
But our tears shall keep thy memory green,
And make it flourish like a Basil-tree.
Rome, 1877.
KEATS’S SONNET ON BLUE
(Century Guild Hobby Horse, July 1886.)
During my tour in America I happened one evening to find myself in
Louisville, Kentucky. The subject I had selected to speak on was the Mission
of Art in the Nineteenth Century, and in the course of my lecture I had
occasion to quote Keats’s Sonnet on Blue as an example of the poet’s delicate
sense of colour-harmonies. When my lecture was concluded there came round
to see me a lady of middle age, with a sweet gentle manner and a most musical
voice. She introduced herself to me as Mrs. Speed, the daughter of George
Keats, and invited me to come and examine the Keats manuscripts in her
possession. I spent most of the next day with her, reading the letters of Keats
to her father, some of which were at that time unpublished, poring over torn
yellow leaves and faded scraps of paper, and wondering at the little Dante in
which Keats had written those marvellous notes on Milton. Some months
afterwards, when I was in California, I received a letter from Mrs. Speed
asking my acceptance of the original manuscript of the sonnet which I had
quoted in my lecture. This manuscript I have had reproduced here, as it seems
to me to possess much psychological interest. It shows us the conditions that
preceded the perfected form, the gradual growth, not of the conception but of
the expression, and the workings of that spirit of selection which is the secret
of style. In the case of poetry, as in the case of the other arts, what may appear
to be simply technicalities of method are in their essence spiritual not
mechanical, and although, in all lovely work, what concerns us is the ultimate
form, not the conditions that necessitate that form, yet the preference that
precedes perfection, the evolution of the beauty, and the mere making of the
music, have, if not their artistic value, at least their value to the artist.
It will be remembered that this sonnet was first published in 1848 by Lord
Houghton in his Life, Letters, and Literary Remains of John Keats. Lord
Houghton does not definitely state where he found it, but it was probably
among the Keats manuscripts belonging to Mr. Charles Brown. It is evidently
taken from a version later than that in my possession, as it accepts all the
corrections, and makes three variations. As in my manuscript the first line is
torn away, I give the sonnet here as it appears in Lord Houghton’s edition.
ANSWER TO A SONNET ENDING THUS:
Dark eyes are dearer far
Than those that make the hyacinthine bell.
By J. H. Reynolds.
Blue! ’Tis the life of heaven,—the domain
Of Cynthia,—the wide palace of the sun,—
The tent of Hesperus and all his train,—
The bosomer of clouds, gold, grey and dun.
Blue! ’Tis the life of waters—ocean
And all its vassal streams: pools numberless
May rage, and foam, and fret, but never can
Subside if not to dark-blue nativeness.
Blue! gentle cousin of the forest green,
Married to green in all the sweetest flowers,
Forget-me-not,—the blue-bell,—and, that queen
Of secrecy, the violet: what strange powers
Hast thou, as a mere shadow! But how great,
When in an Eye thou art alive with fate!
Feb. 1818.
In the Athenæum of the 3rd of June 1876 appeared a letter from Mr. A. J.
Horwood, stating that he had in his possession a copy of The Garden of
Florence in which this sonnet was transcribed. Mr. Horwood, who was
unaware that the sonnet had been already published by Lord Houghton, gives
the transcript at length. His version reads hue for life in the first line, and
bright for wide in the second, and gives the sixth line thus:
With all his tributary streams, pools numberless,
a foot too long: it also reads to for of in the ninth line. Mr. Buxton Forman
is of opinion that these variations are decidedly genuine, but indicative of an
earlier state of the poem than that adopted in Lord Houghton’s edition.
However, now that we have before us Keats’s first draft of his sonnet, it is
difficult to believe that the sixth line in Mr. Horwood’s version is really a
genuine variation. Keats may have written,
Ocean
His tributary streams, pools numberless,
and the transcript may have been carelessly made, but having got his line
right in his first draft, Keats probably did not spoil it in his second. The
Athenæum version inserts a comma after art in the last line, which seems to
me a decided improvement, and eminently characteristic of Keats’s method. I
am glad to see that Mr. Buxton Forman has adopted it.
As for the corrections that Lord Houghton’s version shows Keats to have
made in the eighth and ninth lines of this sonnet, it is evident that they sprang
from Keats’s reluctance to repeat the same word in consecutive lines, except in
cases where a word’s music or meaning was to be emphasized. The
substitution of ‘its’ for ‘his’ in the sixth line is more difficult of explanation. It
was due probably to a desire on Keats’s part not to mar by any echo the fine
personification of Hesperus.
It may be noticed that Keats’s own eyes were brown, and not blue, as
stated by Mrs. Proctor to Lord Houghton. Mrs. Speed showed me a note to
that effect written by Mrs. George Keats on the margin of the page in Lord
Houghton’s Life (p. 100, vol. i.), where Mrs. Proctor’s description is given.
Cowden Clarke made a similar correction in his Recollections, and in some of
the later editions of Lord Houghton’s book the word ‘blue’ is struck out. In
Severn’s portraits of Keats also the eyes are given as brown.
The exquisite sense of colour expressed in the ninth and tenth lines may be
paralleled by
The Ocean with its vastness, its blue green,
of the sonnet to George Keats.
DINNERS AND DISHES
(Pall Mall Gazette, March 7, 1885.)
A man can live for three days without bread, but no man can live for one
day without poetry, was an aphorism of Baudelaire. You can live without
pictures and music but you cannot live without eating, says the author of
Dinners and Dishes; and this latter view is, no doubt, the more popular. Who,
indeed, in these degenerate days would hesitate between an ode and an
omelette, a sonnet and a salmis? Yet the position is not entirely Philistine;
cookery is an art; are not its principles the subject of South Kensington
lectures, and does not the Royal Academy give a banquet once a year?
Besides, as the coming democracy will, no doubt, insist on feeding us all on
penny dinners, it is well that the laws of cookery should be explained: for were
the national meal burned, or badly seasoned, or served up with the wrong
sauce a dreadful revolution might follow.
Under these circumstances we strongly recommend Dinners and Dishes to
every one: it is brief and concise and makes no attempt at eloquence, which is
extremely fortunate. For even on ortolans who could endure oratory? It also
has the advantage of not being illustrated. The subject of a work of art has, of
course, nothing to do with its beauty, but still there is always something
depressing about the coloured lithograph of a leg of mutton.
As regards the author’s particular views, we entirely agree with him on the
important question of macaroni. ‘Never,’ he says, ‘ask me to back a bill for a
man who has given me a macaroni pudding.’ Macaroni is essentially a savoury
dish and may be served with cheese or tomatoes but never with sugar and
milk. There is also a useful description of how to cook risotto—a delightful
dish too rarely seen in England; an excellent chapter on the different kinds of
salads, which should be carefully studied by those many hostesses whose
imaginations never pass beyond lettuce and beetroot; and actually a recipe for
making Brussels sprouts eatable. The last is, of course, a masterpiece.
The real difficulty that we all have to face in life is not so much the science
of cookery as the stupidity of cooks. And in this little handbook to practical
Epicureanism the tyrant of the English kitchen is shown in her proper light.
Her entire ignorance of herbs, her passion for extracts and essences, her total
inability to make a soup which is anything more than a combination of pepper
and gravy, her inveterate habit of sending up bread poultices with pheasants,—
all these sins and many others are ruthlessly unmasked by the author.
Ruthlessly and rightly. For the British cook is a foolish woman who should be
turned for her iniquities into a pillar of salt which she never knows how to use.
But our author is not local merely. He has been in many lands; he has eaten
back-hendl at Vienna and kulibatsch at St. Petersburg; he has had the courage
to face the buffalo veal of Roumania and to dine with a German family at one
o’clock; he has serious views on the right method of cooking those famous
white truffles of Turin of which Alexandre Dumas was so fond; and, in the
face of the Oriental Club, declares that Bombay curry is better than the curry
of Bengal. In fact he seems to have had experience of almost every kind of
meal except the ‘square meal’ of the Americans. This he should study at once;
there is a great field for the philosophic epicure in the United States. Boston
beans may be dismissed at once as delusions, but soft-shell crabs, terrapin,
canvas-back ducks, blue fish and the pompono of New Orleans are all
wonderful delicacies, particularly when one gets them at Delmonico’s. Indeed,
the two most remarkable bits of scenery in the States are undoubtedly
Delmonico’s and the Yosemité Valley; and the former place has done more to
promote a good feeling between England and America than anything else has
in this century.
We hope the ‘Wanderer’ will go there soon and add a chapter to Dinners
and Dishes, and that his book will have in England the influence it deserves.
There are twenty ways of cooking a potato and three hundred and sixty-five
ways of cooking an egg, yet the British cook, up to the present moment,
knows only three methods of sending up either one or the other.
SHAKESPEARE ON SCENERY
(Dramatic Review, March 14, 1885.)
I have often heard people wonder what Shakespeare would say, could he
see Mr. Irving’s production of his Much Ado About Nothing, or Mr. Wilson
Barrett’s setting of his Hamlet. Would he take pleasure in the glory of the
scenery and the marvel of the colour? Would he be interested in the Cathedral
of Messina, and the battlements of Elsinore? Or would he be indifferent, and
say the play, and the play only, is the thing?
Speculations like these are always pleasurable, and in the present case
happen to be profitable also. For it is not difficult to see what Shakespeare’s
attitude would be; not difficult, that is to say, if one reads Shakespeare himself,
instead of reading merely what is written about him.
Speaking, for instance, directly, as the manager of a London theatre,
through the lips of the chorus in Henry V., he complains of the smallness of
the stage on which he has to produce the pageant of a big historical play, and
of the want of scenery which obliges him to cut out many of its most
picturesque incidents, apologises for the scanty number of supers who had to
play the soldiers, and for the shabbiness of the properties, and, finally,
expresses his regret at being unable to bring on real horses.
In the Midsummer Night’s Dream, again, he gives us a most amusing
picture of the straits to which theatrical managers of his day were reduced by
the want of proper scenery. In fact, it is impossible to read him without seeing
that he is constantly protesting against the two special limitations of the
Elizabethan stage—the lack of suitable scenery, and the fashion of men
playing women’s parts, just as he protests against other difficulties with which
managers of theatres have still to contend, such as actors who do not
understand their words; actors who miss their cues; actors who overact their
parts; actors who mouth; actors who gag; actors who play to the gallery, and
amateur actors.
And, indeed, a great dramatist, as he was, could not but have felt very
much hampered at being obliged continually to interrupt the progress of a play
in order to send on some one to explain to the audience that the scene was to
be changed to a particular place on the entrance of a particular character, and
after his exit to somewhere else; that the stage was to represent the deck of a
ship in a storm, or the interior of a Greek temple, or the streets of a certain
town, to all of which inartistic devices Shakespeare is reduced, and for which
he always amply apologizes. Besides this clumsy method, Shakespeare had
two other substitutes for scenery—the hanging out of a placard, and his
descriptions. The first of these could hardly have satisfied his passion for
picturesqueness and his feeling for beauty, and certainly did not satisfy the
dramatic critic of his day. But as regards the description, to those of us who
look on Shakespeare not merely as a playwright but as a poet, and who enjoy
reading him at home just as much as we enjoy seeing him acted, it may be a
matter of congratulation that he had not at his command such skilled
machinists as are in use now at the Princess’s and at the Lyceum. For had
Cleopatra’s barge, for instance, been a structure of canvas and Dutch metal, it
would probably have been painted over or broken up after the withdrawal of
the piece, and, even had it survived to our own day, would, I am afraid, have
become extremely shabby by this time. Whereas now the beaten gold of its
poop is still bright, and the purple of its sails still beautiful; its silver oars are
not tired of keeping time to the music of the flutes they follow, nor the
Nereid’s flower-soft hands of touching its silken tackle; the mermaid still lies
at its helm, and still on its deck stand the boys with their coloured fans. Yet
lovely as all Shakespeare’s descriptive passages are, a description is in its
essence undramatic. Theatrical audiences are far more impressed by what they
look at than by what they listen to; and the modern dramatist, in having the
surroundings of his play visibly presented to the audience when the curtain
rises, enjoys an advantage for which Shakespeare often expresses his desire. It
is true that Shakespeare’s descriptions are not what descriptions are in modern
plays—accounts of what the audience can observe for themselves; they are the
imaginative method by which he creates in the mind of the spectators the
image of that which he desires them to see. Still, the quality of the drama is
action. It is always dangerous to pause for picturesqueness. And the
introduction of self-explanatory scenery enables the modern method to be far
more direct, while the loveliness of form and colour which it gives us, seems
to me often to create an artistic temperament in the audience, and to produce
that joy in beauty for beauty’s sake, without which the great masterpieces of
art can never be understood, to which, and to which only, are they ever
revealed.
To talk of the passion of a play being hidden by the paint, and of sentiment
being killed by scenery, is mere emptiness and folly of words. A noble play,
nobly mounted, gives us double artistic pleasure. The eye as well as the ear is
gratified, and the whole nature is made exquisitely receptive of the influence
of imaginative work. And as regards a bad play, have we not all seen large
audiences lured by the loveliness of scenic effect into listening to rhetoric
posing as poetry, and to vulgarity doing duty for realism? Whether this be
good or evil for the public I will not here discuss, but it is evident that the
playwright, at any rate, never suffers.
Indeed, the artist who really has suffered through the modern mounting of
plays is not the dramatist at all, but the scene-painter proper. He is rapidly
being displaced by the stage-carpenter. Now and then, at Drury Lane, I have
seen beautiful old front cloths let down, as perfect as pictures some of them,
and pure painter’s work, and there are many which we all remember at other
theatres, in front of which some dialogue was reduced to graceful dumb-show
through the hammer and tin-tacks behind. But as a rule the stage is
overcrowded with enormous properties, which are not merely far more
expensive and cumbersome than scene-paintings, but far less beautiful, and far
less true. Properties kill perspective. A painted door is more like a real door
than a real door is itself, for the proper conditions of light and shade can be
given to it; and the excessive use of built-up structures always makes the stage
too glaring, for as they have to be lit from behind, as well as from the front,
the gas-jets become the absolute light of the scene instead of the means merely
by which we perceive the conditions of light and shadow which the painter has
desired to show us.
So, instead of bemoaning the position of the playwright, it were better for
the critics to exert whatever influence they may possess towards restoring the
scene-painter to his proper position as an artist, and not allowing him to be
built over by the property man, or hammered to death by the carpenter. I have
never seen any reason myself why such artists as Mr. Beverley, Mr. Walter
Hann, and Mr. Telbin should not be entitled to become Academicians. They
have certainly as good a claim as have many of those R.A.’s whose total
inability to paint we can see every May for a shilling.
And lastly, let those critics who hold up for our admiration the simplicity
of the Elizabethan stage remember that they are lauding a condition of things
against which Shakespeare himself, in the spirit of a true artist, always
strongly protested.
HENRY THE FOURTH AT OXFORD
(Dramatic Review, May 23, 1885.)
I have been told that the ambition of every Dramatic Club is to act Henry
IV. I am not surprised. The spirit of comedy is as fervent in this play as is the
spirit of chivalry; it is an heroic pageant as well as an heroic poem, and like
most of Shakespeare’s historical dramas it contains an extraordinary number
of thoroughly good acting parts, each of which is absolutely individual in
character, and each of which contributes to the evolution of the plot.
To Oxford belongs the honour of having been the first to present on the
stage this noble play, and the production which I saw last week was in every
way worthy of that lovely town, that mother of sweetness and of light. For, in
spite of the roaring of the young lions at the Union, and the screaming of the
rabbits in the home of the vivisector, in spite of Keble College, and the
tramways, and the sporting prints, Oxford still remains the most beautiful
thing in England, and nowhere else are life and art so exquisitely blended, so
perfectly made one. Indeed, in most other towns art has often to present
herself in the form of a reaction against the sordid ugliness of ignoble lives,
but at Oxford she comes to us as an exquisite flower born of the beauty of life
and expressive of life’s joy. She finds her home by the Isis as once she did by
the Ilissus; the Magdalen walks and the Magdalen cloisters are as dear to her
as were ever the silver olives of Colonus and the golden gateway of the house
of Pallas: she covers with fanlike tracery the vaulted entrance to Christ Church
Hall, and looks out from the windows of Merton; her feet have stirred the
Cumnor cowslips, and she gathers fritillaries in the river-fields. To her the
clamour of the schools and the dullness of the lecture-room are a weariness
and a vexation of spirit; she seeks not to define virtue, and cares little for the
categories; she smiles on the swift athlete whose plastic grace has pleased her,
and rejoices in the young Barbarians at their games; she watches the rowers
from the reedy bank and gives myrtle to her lovers, and laurels to her poets,
and rue to those who talk wisely in the street; she makes the earth lovely to all
who dream with Keats; she opens high heaven to all who soar with Shelley;
and turning away her head from pedant, proctor and Philistine, she has
welcomed to her shrine a band of youthful actors, knowing that they have
sought with much ardour for the stern secret of Melpomene, and caught with
much gladness the sweet laughter of Thalia. And to me this ardour and this
gladness were the two most fascinating qualities of the Oxford performance,
as indeed they are qualities which are necessary to any fine dramatic
production. For without quick and imaginative observation of life the most
beautiful play becomes dull in presentation, and what is not conceived in
delight by the actor can give no delight at all to others.
I know that there are many who consider that Shakespeare is more for the
study than for the stage. With this view I do not for a moment agree.
Shakespeare wrote the plays to be acted, and we have no right to alter the form
which he himself selected for the full expression of his work. Indeed, many of
the beauties of that work can be adequately conveyed to us only through the
actor’s art. As I sat in the Town Hall of Oxford the other night, the majesty of
the mighty lines of the play seemed to me to gain new music from the clear
young voices that uttered them, and the ideal grandeur of the heroism to be
made more real to the spectators by the chivalrous bearing, the noble gesture
and the fine passion of its exponents. Even the dresses had their dramatic
value. Their archæological accuracy gave us, immediately on the rise of the
curtain, a perfect picture of the time. As the knights and nobles moved across
the stage in the flowing robes of peace and in the burnished steel of battle, we
needed no dreary chorus to tell us in what age or land the play’s action was
passing, for the fifteenth century in all the dignity and grace of its apparel was
living actually before us, and the delicate harmonies of colour struck from the
first a dominant note of beauty which added to the intellectual realism of
archæology the sensuous charm of art.
I have rarely seen a production better stage-managed. Indeed, I hope that
the University will take some official notice of this delightful work of art.
Why should not degrees be granted for good acting? Are they not given to
those who misunderstand Plato and who mistranslate Aristotle? And should
the artist be passed over? No. To Prince Hal, Hotspur and Falstaff, D.C.L.’s
should be gracefully offered. I feel sure they would be gracefully accepted. To
the rest of the company the crimson or the sheepskin hood might be assigned
honoris causâ to the eternal confusion of the Philistine, and the rage of the
industrious and the dull. Thus would Oxford confer honour on herself, and the
artist be placed in his proper position. However, whether or not Convocation
recognizes the claims of culture, I hope that the Oxford Dramatic Society will
produce every summer for us some noble play like Henry IV. For, in plays of
this kind, plays which deal with bygone times, there is always this peculiar
charm, that they combine in one exquisite presentation the passions that are
living with the picturesqueness that is dead. And when we have the modern
spirit given to us in an antique form, the very remoteness of that form can be
made a method of increased realism. This was Shakespeare’s own attitude
towards the ancient world, this is the attitude we in this century should adopt
towards his plays, and with a feeling akin to this it seemed to me that these
brilliant young Oxonians were working. If it was so, their aim is the right one.
For while we look to the dramatist to give romance to realism, we ask of the
actor to give realism to romance.
A HANDBOOK TO MARRIAGE
(Pall Mall Gazette, November 18, 1885.)
In spite of its somewhat alarming title this book may be highly
recommended to every one. As for the authorities the author quotes, they are
almost numberless, and range from Socrates down to Artemus Ward. He tells
us of the wicked bachelor who spoke of marriage as ‘a very harmless
amusement’ and advised a young friend of his to ‘marry early and marry
often’; of Dr. Johnson who proposed that marriage should be arranged by the
Lord Chancellor, without the parties concerned having any choice in the
matter; of the Sussex labourer who asked, ‘Why should I give a woman half
my victuals for cooking the other half?’ and of Lord Verulam who thought that
unmarried men did the best public work. And, indeed, marriage is the one
subject on which all women agree and all men disagree. Our author, however,
is clearly of the same opinion as the Scotch lassie who, on her father warning
her what a solemn thing it was to get married, answered, ‘I ken that, father, but
it’s a great deal solemner to be single.’ He may be regarded as the champion of
the married life. Indeed, he has a most interesting chapter on marriage-made
men, and though he dissents, and we think rightly, from the view recently put
forward by a lady or two on the Women’s Rights platform that Solomon owed
all his wisdom to the number of his wives, still he appeals to Bismarck, John
Stuart Mill, Mahommed, and Lord Beaconsfield, as instances of men whose
success can be traced to the influence of the women they married. Archbishop
Whately once defined woman as ‘a creature that does not reason and pokes the
fire from the top,’ but since his day the higher education of women has
considerably altered their position. Women have always had an emotional
sympathy with those they love; Girton and Newnham have rendered
intellectual sympathy also possible. In our day it is best for a man to be
married, and men must give up the tyranny in married life which was once so
dear to them, and which, we are afraid, lingers still, here and there.
‘Do you wish to be my wife, Mabel?’ said a little boy. ‘Yes,’ incautiously
answered Mabel. ‘Then pull off my boots.’
On marriage vows our author has, too, very sensible views and very
amusing stories. He tells of a nervous bridegroom who, confusing the
baptismal and marriage ceremonies, replied when asked if he consented to
take the bride for his wife: ‘I renounce them all’; of a Hampshire rustic who,
when giving the ring, said solemnly to the bride: ‘With my body I thee wash
up, and with all my hurdle goods I thee and thou’; of another who when asked
whether he would take his partner to be his wedded wife, replied with
shameful indecision: ‘Yes, I’m willin’; but I’d a sight rather have her sister’;
and of a Scotch lady who, on the occasion of her daughter’s wedding, was
asked by an old friend whether she might congratulate her on the event, and
answered: ‘Yes, yes, upon the whole it is very satisfactory; it is true Jeannie
hates her gudeman, but then there’s always a something!’ Indeed, the good
stories contained in this book are quite endless and make it very pleasant
reading, while the good advice is on all points admirable.
Most young married people nowadays start in life with a dreadful
collection of ormolu inkstands covered with sham onyxes, or with a perfect
museum of salt-cellars. We strongly recommend this book as one of the best of
wedding presents. It is a complete handbook to an earthly Paradise, and its
author may be regarded as the Murray of matrimony and the Baedeker of bliss.
TO READ OR NOT TO READ
(Pall Mall Gazette, February 8, 1886.)
Books, I fancy, may be conveniently divided into three classes:
1. Books to read, such as Cicero’s Letters, Suetonius, Vasari’s Lives of the
Painters, the Autobiography of Benvenuto Cellini, Sir John Mandeville, Marco
Polo, St. Simon’s Memoirs, Mommsen, and (till we get a better one) Grote’s
History of Greece.
2. Books to re-read, such as Plato and Keats: in the sphere of poetry, the
masters not the minstrels; in the sphere of philosophy, the seers not the
savants.
3. Books not to read at all, such as Thomson’s Seasons, Rogers’s Italy,
Paley’s Evidences, all the Fathers except St. Augustine, all John Stuart Mill
except the essay on Liberty, all Voltaire’s plays without any exception,
Butler’s Analogy, Grant’s Aristotle, Hume’s England, Lewes’s History of
Philosophy, all argumentative books and all books that try to prove anything.
The third class is by far the most important. To tell people what to read is,
as a rule, either useless or harmful; for, the appreciation of literature is a
question of temperament not of teaching; to Parnassus there is no primer and
nothing that one can learn is ever worth learning. But to tell people what not to
read is a very different matter, and I venture to recommend it as a mission to
the University Extension Scheme.
Indeed, it is one that is eminently needed in this age of ours, an age that
reads so much, that it has no time to admire, and writes so much, that it has no
time to think. Whoever will select out of the chaos of our modern curricula
‘The Worst Hundred Books,’ and publish a list of them, will confer on the
rising generation a real and lasting benefit.
After expressing these views I suppose I should not offer any suggestions
at all with regard to ‘The Best Hundred Books,’ but I hope you will allow me
the pleasure of being inconsistent, as I am anxious to put in a claim for a book
that has been strangely omitted by most of the excellent judges who have
contributed to your columns. I mean the Greek Anthology. The beautiful
poems contained in this collection seem to me to hold the same position with
regard to Greek dramatic literature as do the delicate little figurines of Tanagra
to the Phidian marbles, and to be quite as necessary for the complete
understanding of the Greek spirit.
I am also amazed to find that Edgar Allan Poe has been passed over. Surely
this marvellous lord of rhythmic expression deserves a place? If, in order to
make room for him, it be necessary to elbow out some one else, I should
elbow out Southey, and I think that Baudelaire might be most advantageously
substituted for Keble.
No doubt, both in the Curse of Kehama and in the Christian Year there are
poetic qualities of a certain kind, but absolute catholicity of taste is not without
its dangers. It is only an auctioneer who should admire all schools of art.
THE LETTERS OF A GREAT WOMAN
(Pall Mall Gazette, March 6, 1886.)
Of the many collections of letters that have appeared in this century few, if
any, can rival for fascination of style and variety of incident the letters of
George Sand which.