M. CARO ON GEORGE SAND
(Pall Mall Gazette, April 14, 1888.)
The biography of a very great man from the pen of a very ladylike writer—
this is the best description we can give of M. Caro’s Life of George Sand. The
late Professor of the Sorbonne could chatter charmingly about culture, and had
all the fascinating insincerity of an accomplished phrase-maker; being an
extremely superior person he had a great contempt for Democracy and its
doings, but he was always popular with the Duchesses of the Faubourg, as
there was nothing in history or in literature that he could not explain away for
their edification; having never done anything remarkable he was naturally
elected a member of the Academy, and he always remained loyal to the
traditions of that thoroughly respectable and thoroughly pretentious institution.
In fact, he was just the sort of man who should never have attempted to write a
Life of George Sand or to interpret George Sand’s genius. He was too
feminine to appreciate the grandeur of that large womanly nature, too much of
a dilettante to realize the masculine force of that strong and ardent mind. He
never gets at the secret of George Sand, and never brings us near to her
wonderful personality. He looks on her simply as a littérateur, as a writer of
pretty stories of country life and of charming, if somewhat exaggerated,
romances. But George Sand was much more than this. Beautiful as are such
books as Consuelo and Mauprat, François le Champi and La Mare au Diable,
yet in none of them is she adequately expressed, by none of them is she
adequately revealed. As Mr. Matthew Arnold said, many years ago, ‘We do
not know George Sand unless we feel the spirit which goes through her work
as a whole.’ With this spirit, however, M. Caro has no sympathy. Madame
Sand’s doctrines are antediluvian, he tells us, her philosophy is quite dead and
her ideas of social regeneration are Utopian, incoherent and absurd. The best
thing for us to do is to forget these silly dreams and to read Teverino and Le
Secrétaire Intime. Poor M. Caro! This spirit, which he treats with such airy
flippancy, is the very leaven of modern life. It is remoulding the world for us
and fashioning our age anew. If it is antediluvian, it is so because the deluge is
yet to come; if it is Utopian, then Utopia must be added to our geographies. To
what curious straits M. Caro is driven by his violent prejudices may be
estimated by the fact that he tries to class George Sand’s novels with the old
Chansons de geste, the stories of adventure characteristic of primitive
literatures; whereas in using fiction as a vehicle of thought, and romance as a
means of influencing the social ideals of her age, George Sand was merely
carrying out the traditions of Voltaire and Rousseau, of Diderot and of
Chateaubriand. The novel, says M. Caro, must be allied either to poetry or to
science. That it has found in philosophy one of its strongest allies seems not to
have occurred to him. In an English critic such a view might possibly be
excusable. Our greatest novelists, such as Fielding, Scott and Thackeray, cared
little for the philosophy of their age. But coming, as it does, from a French
critic, the statement seems to show a strange want of recognition of one of the
most important elements of French fiction. Nor, even in the narrow limits that
he has imposed upon himself, can M. Caro be said to be a very fortunate or
felicitous critic. To take merely one instance out of many, he says nothing of
George Sand’s delightful treatment of art and the artist’s life. And yet how
exquisitely does she analyse each separate art and present it to us in its relation
to life! In Consuelo she tells us of music; in Horace of authorship; in Le
Château des Désertes of acting; in Les Maîtres Mosaïstes of mosaic work; in
Le Château de Pictordu of portrait painting; and in La Daniella of the painting
of landscape. What Mr. Ruskin and Mr. Browning have done for England she
did for France. She invented an art literature. It is unnecessary, however, to
discuss any of M. Caro’s minor failings, for the whole effect of the book, so
far as it attempts to portray for us the scope and character of George Sand’s
genius, is entirely spoiled by the false attitude assumed from the beginning,
and though the dictum may seem to many harsh and exclusive, we cannot help
feeling that an absolute incapacity for appreciating the spirit of a great writer
is no qualification for writing a treatise on the subject.
As for Madame Sand’s private life, which is so intimately connected with
her art (for, like Goethe, she had to live her romances before she could write
them), M. Caro says hardly anything about it. He passes it over with a
modesty that almost makes one blush, and for fear of wounding the
susceptibilities of those grandes dames whose passions M. Paul Bourget
analyses with such subtlety, he transforms her mother, who was a typical
French grisette, into ‘a very amiable and spirituelle milliner’! It must be
admitted that Joseph Surface himself could hardly show greater tact and
delicacy, though we ourselves must plead guilty to preferring Madame Sand’s
own description of her as an ‘enfant du vieux pavé de Paris.’
A FASCINATING BOOK
(Woman’s World, November 1888.)
Mr. Alan Cole’s carefully-edited translation of M. Lefébure’s history of
Embroidery and Lace is one of the most fascinating books that has appeared
on this delightful subject. M. Lefébure is one of the administrators of the
Musée des Arts Décoratifs at Paris, besides being a lace manufacturer; and his
work has not merely an important historical value, but as a handbook of
technical instruction it will be found of the greatest service by all needlewomen. Indeed, as the translator himself points out, M. Lefébure’s book
suggests the question whether it is not rather by the needle and the bobbin,
than by the brush, the graver or the chisel, that the influence of woman should
assert itself in the arts. In Europe, at any rate, woman is sovereign in the
domain of art-needlework, and few men would care to dispute with her the
right of using those delicate implements so intimately associated with the
dexterity of her nimble and slender fingers; nor is there any reason why the
productions of embroidery should not, as Mr. Alan Cole suggests, be placed
on the same level with those of painting, engraving and sculpture, though there
must always be a great difference between those purely decorative arts that
glorify their own material and the more imaginative arts in which the material
is, as it were, annihilated, and absorbed into the creation of a new form. In the
beautifying of modern houses it certainly must be admitted—indeed, it should
be more generally recognized than it is—that rich embroidery on hangings and
curtains, portières, couches and the like, produces a far more decorative and
far more artistic effect than can be gained from our somewhat wearisome
English practice of covering the walls with pictures and engravings; and the
almost complete disappearance of embroidery from dress has robbed modern
costume of one of the chief elements of grace and fancy.
That, however, a great improvement has taken place in English embroidery
during the last ten or fifteen years cannot, I think, be denied. It is shown, not
merely in the work of individual artists, such as Mrs. Holiday, Miss May
Morris and others, but also in the admirable productions of the South
Kensington School of Embroidery (the best—indeed, the only real good—
school that South Kensington has produced). It is pleasant to note on turning
over the leaves of M. Lefébure’s book, that in this we are merely carrying out
certain old traditions of Early English art. In the seventh century, St. Ethelreda,
first abbess of the monastery of Ely, made an offering to St. Cuthbert of a
sacred ornament she had worked with gold and precious stones, and the cope
and maniple of St. Cuthbert, which are preserved at Durham, are considered to
be specimens of opus Anglicanum. In the year 800, the Bishop of Durham
allotted the income of a farm of two hundred acres for life to an embroideress
named Eanswitha, in consideration of her keeping in repair the vestments of
the clergy in his diocese. The battle standard of King Alfred was embroidered
by Danish Princesses; and the Anglo-Saxon Gudric gave Alcuid a piece of
land, on condition that she instructed his daughter in needle-work. Queen
Mathilda bequeathed to the Abbey of the Holy Trinity at Caen a tunic
embroidered at Winchester by the wife of one Alderet; and when William
presented himself to the English nobles, after the Battle of Hastings, he wore a
mantle covered with Anglo-Saxon embroideries, which is probably, M.
Lefébure suggests, the same as that mentioned in the inventory of the Bayeux
Cathedral, where, after the entry relating to the broderie à telle (representing
the conquest of England), two mantles are described—one of King William,
‘all of gold, powdered with crosses and blossoms of gold, and edged along the
lower border with an orphrey of figures.’ The most splendid example of the
opus Anglicanum now in existence is, of course, the Syon cope at the South
Kensington Museum; but English work seems to have been celebrated all over
the Continent. Pope Innocent iv. so admired the splendid vestments worn by
the English clergy in 1246, that he ordered similar articles from Cistercian
monasteries in England. St. Dunstan, the artistic English monk, was known as
a designer for embroideries; and the stole of St. Thomas à Becket is still
preserved in the cathedral at Sens, and shows us the interlaced scroll-forms
used by Anglo-Saxon MS. illuminators.
How far this modern artistic revival of rich and delicate embroidery will
bear fruit depends, of course, almost entirely on the energy and study that
women are ready to devote to it; but I think that it must be admitted that all
our decorative arts in Europe at present have, at least, this element of strength
—that they are in immediate relationship with the decorative arts of Asia.
Wherever we find in European history a revival of decorative art, it has, I
fancy, nearly always been due to Oriental influence and contact with Oriental
nations. Our own keenly intellectual art has more than once been ready to
sacrifice real decorative beauty either to imitative presentation or to ideal
motive. It has taken upon itself the burden of expression, and has sought to
interpret the secrets of thought and passion. In its marvellous truth of
presentation it has found its strength, and yet its weakness is there also. It is
never with impunity that an art seeks to mirror life. If Truth has her revenge
upon those who do not follow her, she is often pitiless to her worshippers. In
Byzantium the two arts met—Greek art, with its intellectual sense of form, and
its quick sympathy with humanity; Oriental art, with its gorgeous materialism,
its frank rejection of imitation, its wonderful secrets of craft and colour, its
splendid textures, its rare metals and jewels, its marvellous and priceless
traditions. They had, indeed, met before, but in Byzantium they were married;
and the sacred tree of the Persians, the palm of Zoroaster, was embroidered on
the hem of the garments of the Western world. Even the Iconoclasts, the
Philistines of theological history, who, in one of those strange outbursts of
rage against Beauty that seem to occur only amongst European nations, rose
up against the wonder and magnificence of the new art, served merely to
distribute its secrets more widely; and in the Liber Pontificalis, written in 687
by Athanasius, the librarian, we read of an influx into Rome of gorgeous
embroideries, the work of men who had arrived from Constantinople and from
Greece. The triumph of the Mussulman gave the decorative art of Europe a
new departure—that very principle of their religion that forbade the actual
representation of any object in nature being of the greatest artistic service to
them, though it was not, of course, strictly carried out. The Saracens
introduced into Sicily the art of weaving silken and golden fabrics; and from
Sicily the manufacture of fine stuffs spread to the North of Italy, and became
localized in Genoa, Florence, Venice, and other towns. A still greater artmovement took place in Spain under the Moors and Saracens, who brought
over workmen from Persia to make beautiful things for them. M. Lefébure
tells us of Persian embroidery penetrating as far as Andalusia; and Almeria,
like Palermo, had its Hôtel des Tiraz, which rivalled the Hôtel des Tiraz at
Bagdad, tiraz being the generic name for ornamental tissues and costumes
made with them. Spangles (those pretty little discs of gold, silver, or polished
steel, used in certain embroidery for dainty glinting effects) were a Saracenic
invention; and Arabic letters often took the place of letters in the Roman
characters for use in inscriptions upon embroidered robes and Middle Age
tapestries, their decorative value being so much greater. The book of crafts by
Etienne Boileau, provost of the merchants in 1258–1268, contains a curious
enumeration of the different craft-guilds of Paris, among which we find ‘the
tapiciers, or makers of the tapis sarrasinois (or Saracen cloths), who say that
their craft is for the service only of churches, or great men like kings and
counts’; and, indeed, even in our own day, nearly all our words descriptive of
decorative textures and decorative methods point to an Oriental origin. What
the inroads of the Mohammedans did for Sicily and Spain, the return of the
Crusaders did for the other countries of Europe. The nobles who left for
Palestine clad in armour, came back in the rich stuffs of the East; and their
costumes, pouches (aumônières sarrasinoises), and caparisons excited the
admiration of the needle-workers of the West. Matthew Paris says that at the
sacking of Antioch, in 1098, gold, silver and priceless costumes were so
equally distributed among the Crusaders, that many who the night before were
famishing and imploring relief, suddenly found themselves overwhelmed with
wealth; and Robert de Clair tells us of the wonderful fêtes that followed the
capture of Constantinople. The thirteenth century, as M. Lefébure points out,
was conspicuous for an increased demand in the West for embroidery. Many
Crusaders made offerings to churches of plunder from Palestine; and St.
Louis, on his return from the first Crusade, offered thanks at St. Denis to God
for mercies bestowed on him during his six years’ absence and travel, and
presented some richly embroidered stuffs to be used on great occasions as
coverings to the reliquaries containing the relics of holy martyrs. European
embroidery, having thus become possessed of new materials and wonderful
methods, developed on its own intellectual and imitative lines, inclining, as it
went on, to the purely pictorial, and seeking to rival painting, and to produce
landscapes and figure-subjects with elaborate perspective and subtle aerial
effects. A fresh Oriental influence, however, came through the Dutch and the
Portuguese, and the famous Compagnie des Grandes Indes; and M. Lefébure
gives an illustration of a door-hanging now in the Cluny Museum, where we
find the French fleurs-de-lys intermixed with Indian ornament. The hangings
of Madame de Maintenon’s room at Fontainebleau, which were embroidered
at St. Cyr, represent Chinese scenery upon a jonquil-yellow ground.
Clothes were sent out ready cut to the East to be embroidered, and many of
the delightful coats of the period of Louis xv. and Louis xvi. owe their dainty
decoration to the needles of Chinese artists. In our own day the influence of
the East is strongly marked. Persia has sent us her carpets for patterns, and
Cashmere her lovely shawls, and India her dainty muslins finely worked with
gold thread palmates, and stitched over with iridescent beetles’ wings. We are
beginning now to dye by Oriental methods, and the silk robes of China and
Japan have taught us new wonders of colour-combination, and new subtleties
of delicate design. Whether we have yet learned to make a wise use of what
we have acquired is less certain. If books produce an effect, this book of M.
Lefébure should certainly make us study with still deeper interest the whole
question of embroidery, and by those who already work with their needles it
will be found full of most fertile suggestion and most admirable advice.
Even to read of the marvellous works of embroidery that were fashioned in
bygone ages is pleasant. Time has kept a few fragments of Greek embroidery
of the fourth century b.c. for us. One is figured in M. Lefébure’s book—a
chain-stitch embroidery of yellow flax upon a mulberry-coloured worsted
material, with graceful spirals and palmetto-patterns: and another, a tapestried
cloth powdered with ducks, was reproduced in the Woman’s World some
months ago for an article by Mr. Alan Cole. Now and then we find in the tomb
of some dead Egyptian a piece of delicate work. In the treasury at Ratisbon is
preserved a specimen of Byzantine embroidery on which the Emperor
Constantine is depicted riding on a white palfrey, and receiving homage from
the East and West. Metz has a red silk cope wrought with great eagles, the gift
of Charlemagne, and Bayeux the needle-wrought epic of Queen Matilda. But
where is the great crocus-coloured robe, wrought for Athena, on which the
gods fought against the giants? Where is the huge velarium that Nero stretched
across the Colosseum at Rome, on which was represented the starry sky, and
Apollo driving a chariot drawn by steeds? How one would like to see the
curious table-napkins wrought for Heliogabalus, on which were displayed all
the dainties and viands that could be wanted for a feast; or the mortuary-cloth
of King Chilperic, with its three hundred golden bees; or the fantastic robes
that excited the indignation of the Bishop of Pontus, and were embroidered
with ‘lions, panthers, bears, dogs, forests, rocks, hunters—all, in fact, that
painters can copy from nature.’ Charles of Orleans had a coat, on the sleeves
of which were embroidered the verses of a song beginning ‘Madame, je suis
tout joyeux,’ the musical accompaniment of the words being wrought in gold
thread, and each note, of square shape in those days, formed with four pearls.
The room prepared in the palace at Rheims for the use of Queen Joan of
Burgundy was decorated with ‘thirteen hundred and twenty-one papegauts
(parrots) made in broidery and blazoned with the King’s arms, and five
hundred and sixty-one butterflies, whose wings were similarly ornamented
with the Queen’s arms—the whole worked in fine gold.’ Catherine de Medicis
had a mourning-bed made for her ‘of black velvet embroidered with pearls and
powdered with crescents and suns.’ Its curtains were of damask, ‘with leafy
wreaths and garlands figured upon a gold and silver ground, and fringed along
the edges with broideries of pearls,’ and it stood in a room hung with rows of
the Queen’s devices in cut black velvet on cloth of silver. Louis xiv. had goldembroidered caryatides fifteen feet high in his apartment. The state bed of
Sobieski, King of Poland, was made of Smyrna gold brocade embroidered in
turquoises and pearls, with verses from the Koran; its supports were of silvergilt, beautifully chased and profusely set with enamelled and jewelled
medallions. He had taken it from the Turkish camp before Vienna, and the
standard of Mahomet had stood under it. The Duchess de la Ferté wore a dress
of reddish-brown velvet, the skirt of which, adjusted in graceful folds, was
held up by big butterflies made of Dresden china; the front was a tablier of
cloth of silver, upon which was embroidered an orchestra of musicians
arranged in a pyramidal group, consisting of a series of six ranks of
performers, with beautiful instruments wrought in raised needle-work. ‘Into
the night go one and all,’ as Mr. Henley sings in his charming Ballade of Dead
Actors.
Many of the facts related by M. Lefébure about the embroiderers’ guilds
are also extremely interesting. Etienne Boileau, in his book of crafts, to which
I have already alluded, tells us that a member of the guild was prohibited from
using gold of less value than ‘eight sous (about 6s.) the skein; he was bound to
use the best silk, and never to mix thread with silk, because that made the
work false and bad.’ The test or trial piece prescribed for a worker who was
the son of a master-embroiderer was ‘a single figure, a sixth of the natural
size, to be shaded in gold’; whilst one not the son of a master was required to
produce ‘a complete incident with many figures.’ The book of crafts also
mentions ‘cutters-out and stencillers and illuminators’ amongst those
employed in the industry of embroidery. In 1551 the Parisian Corporation of
Embroiderers issued a notice that ‘for the future, the colouring in
representations of nude figures and faces should be done in three or four
gradations of carnation-dyed silk, and not, as formerly, in white silks.’ During
the fifteenth century every household of any position retained the services of
an embroiderer by the year. The preparation of colours also, whether for
painting or for dyeing threads and textile fabrics, was a matter which, M.
Lefébure points out, received close attention from the artists of the Middle
Ages. Many undertook long journeys to obtain the more famous recipes,
which they filed, subsequently adding to and correcting them as experience
dictated. Nor were great artists above making and supplying designs for
embroidery. Raphael made designs for Francis i., and Boucher for Louis xv.;
and in the Ambras collection at Vienna is a superb set of sacerdotal robes from
designs by the brothers Van Eyck and their pupils. Early in the sixteenth
century books of embroidery designs were produced, and their success was so
great that in a few years French, German, Italian, Flemish, and English
publishers spread broadcast books of design made by their best engravers. In
the same century, in order to give the designers opportunity of studying
directly from nature, Jean Robin opened a garden with conservatories, in
which he cultivated strange varieties of plants then but little known in our
latitudes. The rich brocades and brocadelles of the time are characterized by
the introduction of large flowery patterns, with pomegranates and other fruits
with fine foliage.
The second part of M. Lefébure’s book is devoted to the history of lace,
and though some may not find it quite as interesting as the earlier portion it
will more than repay perusal; and those who still work in this delicate and
fanciful art will find many valuable suggestions in it, as well as a large number
of exceedingly beautiful designs. Compared to embroidery, lace seems
comparatively modern. M. Lefébure and Mr. Alan Cole tell us that there is no
reliable or documentary evidence to prove the existence of lace before the
fifteenth century. Of course in the East, light tissues, such as gauzes, muslins,
and nets, were made at very early times, and were used as veils and scarfs
after the manner of subsequent laces, and women enriched them with some
sort of embroidery, or varied the openness of them by here and there drawing
out threads. The threads of fringes seem also to have been plaited and knotted
together, and the borders of one of the many fashions of Roman toga were of
open reticulated weaving. The Egyptian Museum at the Louvre has a curious
network embellished with glass beads; and the monk Reginald, who took part
in opening the tomb of St. Cuthbert at Durham in the twelfth century, writes
that the Saint’s shroud had a fringe of linen threads an inch long, surmounted
by a border, ‘worked upon the threads,’ with representations of birds and pairs
of beasts, there being between each such pair a branching tree, a survival of
the palm of Zoroaster, to which I have before alluded. Our authors, however,
do not in these examples recognize lace, the production of which involves
more refined and artistic methods, and postulates a combination of skill and
varied execution carried to a higher degree of perfection. Lace, as we know it,
seems to have had its origin in the habit of embroidering linen. White
embroidery on linen has, M. Lefébure remarks, a cold and monotonous aspect;
that with coloured threads is brighter and gayer in effect, but is apt to fade in
frequent washing; but white embroidery relieved by open spaces in, or shapes
cut from, the linen ground, is possessed of an entirely new charm; and from a
sense of this the birth may be traced of an art in the result of which happy
contrasts are effected between ornamental details of close texture and others of
open-work.
Soon, also, was suggested the idea that, instead of laboriously withdrawing
threads from stout linen, it would be more convenient to introduce a needlemade pattern into an open network ground, which was called a lacis. Of this
kind of embroidery many specimens are extant. The Cluny Museum possesses
a linen cap said to have belonged to Charles v.; and an alb of linen drawnthread work, supposed to have been made by Anne of Bohemia (1527), is
preserved in the cathedral at Prague. Catherine de Medicis had a bed draped
with squares of réseuil, or lacis, and it is recorded that ‘the girls and servants
of her household consumed much time in making squares of réseuil.’ The
interesting pattern-books for open-ground embroidery, of which the first was
published in 1527 by Pierre Quinty, of Cologne, supply us with the means of
tracing the stages in the transition from white thread embroidery to needlepoint lace. We meet in them with a style of needle-work which differs from
embroidery in not being wrought upon a stuff foundation. It is, in fact, true
lace, done, as it were, ‘in the air,’ both ground and pattern being entirely
produced by the lace-maker.
The elaborate use of lace in costume was, of course, largely stimulated by
the fashion of wearing ruffs, and their companion cuffs or sleeves. Catherine
de Medicis induced one Frederic Vinciolo to come from Italy and make ruffs
and gadrooned collars, the fashion of which she started in France; and Henry
iii. was so punctilious over his ruffs that he would iron and goffer his cuffs and
collars himself rather than see their pleats limp and out of shape. The patternbooks also gave a great impulse to the art. M. Lefébure mentions German
books with patterns of eagles, heraldic emblems, hunting scenes, and plants
and leaves belonging to Northern vegetation; and Italian books, in which the
motifs consist of oleander blossoms, and elegant wreaths and scrolls,
landscapes with mythological scenes, and hunting episodes, less realistic than
the Northern ones, in which appear fauns, and nymphs or amorini shooting
arrows. With regard to these patterns, M. Lefébure notices a curious fact. The
oldest painting in which lace is depicted is that of a lady, by Carpaccio, who
died about 1523. The cuffs of the lady are edged with a narrow lace, the
pattern of which reappears in Vecellio’s Corona, a book not published until
1591. This particular pattern was, therefore, in use at least eighty years before
it got into circulation with other published patterns.
It was not, however, till the seventeenth century that lace acquired a really
independent character and individuality, and M. Duplessis states that the
production of the more noteworthy of early laces owes more to the influence
of men than to that of women. The reign of Louis xiv. witnessed the
production of the most stately needle-point laces, the transformation of
Venetian point, and the growth of Points d’Alençon, d’Argentan, de Bruxelles
and d’Angleterre.
The king, aided by Colbert, determined to make France the centre, if
possible, for lace manufacture, sending for this purpose both to Venice and to
Flanders for workers. The studio of the Gobelins supplied designs. The
dandies had their huge rabatos or bands falling from beneath the chin over the
breast, and great prelates, like Bossuet and Fénelon, wore their wonderful albs
and rochets. It is related of a collar made at Venice for Louis xiv. that the laceworkers, being unable to find sufficiently fine horse-hair, employed some of
their own hairs instead, in order to secure that marvellous delicacy of work
which they aimed at producing.
In the eighteenth century, Venice, finding that laces of lighter texture were
sought after, set herself to make rose-point; and at the Court of Louis xv. the
choice of lace was regulated by still more elaborate etiquette. The Revolution,
however, ruined many of the manufactures. Alençon survived, and Napoleon
encouraged it, and endeavoured to renew the old rules about the necessity of
wearing point-lace at Court receptions. A wonderful piece of lace, powdered
over with devices of bees, and costing 40,000 francs, was ordered. It was
begun for the Empress Josephine, but in the course of its making her
escutcheons were replaced by those of Marie Louise.
M. Lefébure concludes his interesting history by stating very clearly his
attitude towards machine-made lace. ‘It would be an obvious loss to art,’ he
says, ‘should the making of lace by hand become extinct, for machinery, as
skilfully devised as possible, cannot do what the hand does.’ It can give us ‘the
results of processes, not the creations of artistic handicraft.’ Art is absent
‘where formal calculation pretends to supersede emotion’; it is absent ‘where
no trace can be detected of intelligence guiding handicraft, whose hesitancies
even possess peculiar charm . . . cheapness is never commendable in respect of
things which are not absolute necessities; it lowers artistic standard.’ These are
admirable remarks, and with them we take leave of this fascinating book, with
its delightful illustrations, its charming anecdotes, its excellent advice. Mr.
Alan Cole deserves the thanks of all who are interested in art for bringing this
book before the public in so attractive and so inexpensive a form.
HENLEY’S POEMS
(Woman’s World, December 1888.)
‘If I were king,’says Mr. Henley, in one of his most modest rondeaus,
‘Art should aspire, yet ugliness be dear;
Beauty, the shaft, should speed with wit for feather;
And love, sweet love, should never fall to sere,
If I were king.’
And these lines contain, if not the best criticism of his own work, certainly
a very complete statement of his aim and motive as a poet. His little Book of
Verses reveals to us an artist who is seeking to find new methods of expression
and has not merely a delicate sense of beauty and a brilliant, fantastic wit, but
a real passion also for what is horrible, ugly, or grotesque. No doubt,
everything that is worthy of existence is worthy also of art—at least, one
would like to think so—but while echo or mirror can repeat for us a beautiful
thing, to render artistically a thing that is ugly requires the most exquisite
alchemy of form, the most subtle magic of transformation. To me there is
more of the cry of Marsyas than of the singing of Apollo in the earlier poems
of Mr. Henley’s volume, In Hospital: Rhymes and Rhythms, as he calls them.
But it is impossible to deny their power. Some of them are like bright, vivid
pastels; others like charcoal drawings, with dull blacks and murky whites;
others like etchings with deeply-bitten lines, and abrupt contrasts, and clever
colour-suggestions. In fact, they are like anything and everything, except
perfected poems—that they certainly are not. They are still in the twilight.
They are preludes, experiments, inspired jottings in a note-book, and should be
heralded by a design of ‘Genius Making Sketches.’ Rhyme gives architecture
as well as melody to verse; it gives that delightful sense of limitation which in
all the arts is so pleasurable, and is, indeed, one of the secrets of perfection; it
will whisper, as a French critic has said, ‘things unexpected and charming,
things with strange and remote relations to each other,’ and bind them together
in indissoluble bonds of beauty; and in his constant rejection of rhyme, Mr.
Henley seems to me to have abdicated half his power. He is a roi en exil who
has thrown away some of the strings of his lute; a poet who has forgotten the
fairest part of his kingdom.
However, all work criticizes itself. Here is one of Mr. Henley’s inspired
jottings. According to the temperament of the reader, it will serve either as a
model or as the reverse:
As with varnish red and glistening
Dripped his hair; his feet were rigid;
Raised, he settled stiffly sideways:
You could see the hurts were spinal.
He had fallen from an engine,
And been dragged along the metals.
It was hopeless, and they knew it;
So they covered him, and left him.
As he lay, by fits half sentient,
Inarticulately moaning,
With his stockinged feet protruded
Sharp and awkward from the blankets,
To his bed there came a woman,
Stood and looked and sighed a little,
And departed without speaking,
As himself a few hours after.
I was told she was his sweetheart.
They were on the eve of marriage.
She was quiet as a statue,
But her lip was gray and writhen.
In this poem, the rhythm and the music, such as it is, are obvious—perhaps
a little too obvious. In the following I see nothing but ingeniously printed
prose. It is a description—and a very accurate one—of a scene in a hospital
ward. The medical students are supposed to be crowding round the doctor.
What I quote is only a fragment, but the poem itself is a fragment:
So shows the ring
Seen, from behind, round a conjuror
Doing his pitch in the street.
High shoulders, low shoulders, broad shoulders, narrow ones,
Round, square, and angular, serry and shove;
While from within a voice,
Gravely and weightily fluent,
Sounds; and then ceases; and suddenly
(Look at the stress of the shoulders!)
Out of a quiver of silence,
Over the hiss of the spray,
Comes a low cry, and the sound
Of breath quick intaken through teeth
Clenched in resolve. And the master
Breaks from the crowd, and goes,
Wiping his hands,
To the next bed, with his pupils
Flocking and whispering behind him.
Now one can see.
Case Number One
Sits (rather pale) with his bedclothes
Stripped up, and showing his foot
(Alas, for God’s image!)
Swaddled in wet white lint
Brilliantly hideous with red.
Théophile Gautier once said that Flaubert’s style was meant to be read, and
his own style to be looked at. Mr. Henley’s unrhymed rhythms form very
dainty designs, from a typographical point of view. From the point of view of
literature, they are a series of vivid, concentrated impressions, with a keen grip
of fact, a terrible actuality, and an almost masterly power of picturesque
presentation. But the poetic form—what of that?
Well, let us pass to the later poems, to the rondels and rondeaus, the
sonnets and quatorzains, the echoes and the ballades. How brilliant and
fanciful this is! The Toyokuni colour-print that suggested it could not be more
delightful. It seems to have kept all the wilful fantastic charm of the original:
Was I a Samurai renowned,
Two-sworded, fierce, immense of bow?
A histrion angular and profound?
A priest? a porter?—Child, although
I have forgotten clean, I know
That in the shade of Fujisan,
What time the cherry-orchards blow,
I loved you once in old Japan.
As here you loiter, flowing-gowned
And hugely sashed, with pins a-row
Your quaint head as with flamelets crowned,
Demure, inviting—even so,
When merry maids in Miyako
To feel the sweet o’ the year began,
And green gardens to overflow,
I loved you once in old Japan.
Clear shine the hills; the rice-fields round
Two cranes are circling; sleepy and slow,
A blue canal the lake’s blue bound
Breaks at the bamboo bridge; and lo!
Touched with the sundown’s spirit and glow,
I see you turn, with flirted fan,
Against the plum-tree’s bloomy snow . . .
I loved you once in old Japan!
Envoy.
Dear, ’twas a dozen lives ago
But that I was a lucky man
The Toyokuni here will show:
I loved you—once—in old Japan!
This rondel, too—how light it is, and graceful!—
We’ll to the woods and gather may
Fresh from the footprints of the rain.
We’ll to the woods, at every vein
To drink the spirit of the day.
The winds of spring are out at play,
The needs of spring in heart and brain.
We’ll to the woods and gather may
Fresh from the footprints of the rain.
The world’s too near her end, you say?
Hark to the blackbird’s mad refrain!
It waits for her, the vast Inane?
Then, girls, to help her on the way
We’ll to the woods and gather may.
