As one enters Rome from the Via Ostiensis by the Porta San Paolo, the
first object that meets the eye is a marble pyramid which stands close at hand
on the left.
There are many Egyptian obelisks in Rome—tall, snakelike spires of red
sandstone, mottled with strange writings, which remind us of the pillars of
flame which led the children of Israel through the desert away from the land of
the Pharaohs; but more wonderful than these to look upon is this gaunt,
wedge-shaped pyramid standing here in this Italian city, unshattered amid the
ruins and wrecks of time, looking older than the Eternal City itself, like
terrible impassiveness turned to stone. And so in the Middle Ages men
supposed this to be the sepulchre of Remus, who was slain by his own brother
at the founding of the city, so ancient and mysterious it appears; but we have
now, perhaps unfortunately, more accurate information about it, and know that
it is the tomb of one Caius Cestius, a Roman gentleman of small note, who
died about 30 b.c.
Yet though we cannot care much for the dead man who lies in lonely state
beneath it, and who is only known to the world through his sepulchre, still this
pyramid will be ever dear to the eyes of all English-speaking people, because
at evening its shadows fall on the tomb of one who walks with Spenser, and
Shakespeare, and Byron, and Shelley, and Elizabeth Barrett Browning in the
great procession of the sweet singers of England.
For at its foot there is a green sunny slope, known as the Old Protestant
Cemetery, and on this a common-looking grave, which bears the following
inscription:
This grave contains all that was mortal of a young English poet, who on his
deathbed, in the bitterness of his heart, desired these words to be engraven on
his tombstone: Here lies one whose name was writ in water. February 24,
1821.
And the name of the young English poet is John Keats.
Lord Houghton calls this cemetery ‘one of the most beautiful spots on
which the eye and heart of man can rest,’ and Shelley speaks of it as making
one ‘in love with death, to think that one should be buried in so sweet a place’;
and indeed when I saw the violets and the daisies and the poppies that
overgrow the tomb, I remembered how the dead poet had once told his friend
that he thought the ‘intensest pleasure he had received in life was in watching
the growth of flowers,’ and how another time, after lying a while quite still, he
murmured in some strange prescience of early death, ‘I feel the flowers
growing over me.’
But this time-worn stone and these wildflowers are but poor memorials of
one so great as Keats; most of all, too, in this city of Rome, which pays such
honour to her dead; where popes, and emperors, and saints, and cardinals lie
hidden in ‘porphyry wombs,’ or couched in baths of jasper and chalcedony
and malachite, ablaze with precious stones and metals, and tended with
continual service. For very noble is the site, and worthy of a noble monument;
behind looms the grey pyramid, symbol of the world’s age, and filled with
memories of the sphinx, and the lotus leaf, and the glories of old Nile; in front
is the Monte Testaccio, built, it is said, with the broken fragments of the
vessels in which all the nations of the East and the West brought their tribute
to Rome; and a little distance off, along the slope of the hill under the Aurelian
wall, some tall gaunt cypresses rise, like burnt-out funeral torches, to mark the
spot where Shelley’s heart (that ‘heart of hearts’!) lies in the earth; and, above
all, the soil on which we tread is very Rome!
As I stood beside the mean grave of this divine boy, I thought of him as of
a Priest of Beauty slain before his time; and the vision of Guido’s St. Sebastian
came before my eyes as I saw him at Genoa, a lovely brown boy, with crisp,
clustering hair and red lips, bound by his evil enemies to a tree, and though
pierced by arrows, raising his eyes with divine, impassioned gaze towards the
Eternal Beauty of the opening heavens. And thus my thoughts shaped
themselves to rhyme:
HEU MISERANDE PUER
Rid of the world’s injustice and its pain,
He rests at last beneath God’s veil of blue;
Taken from life while life and love were new
The youngest of the martyrs here is lain,
Fair as Sebastian and as foully slain.
No cypress shades his grave, nor funeral yew,
But red-lipped daisies, violets drenched with dew,
And sleepy poppies, catch the evening rain.
O proudest heart that broke for misery!
O saddest poet that the world hath seen!
O sweetest singer of the English land!
Thy name was writ in water on the sand,
But our tears shall keep thy memory green,
And make it flourish like a Basil-tree.
Rome, 1877.
KEATS’S SONNET ON BLUE
(Century Guild Hobby Horse, July 1886.)
During my tour in America I happened one evening to find myself in
Louisville, Kentucky. The subject I had selected to speak on was the Mission
of Art in the Nineteenth Century, and in the course of my lecture I had
occasion to quote Keats’s Sonnet on Blue as an example of the poet’s delicate
sense of colour-harmonies. When my lecture was concluded there came round
to see me a lady of middle age, with a sweet gentle manner and a most musical
voice. She introduced herself to me as Mrs. Speed, the daughter of George
Keats, and invited me to come and examine the Keats manuscripts in her
possession. I spent most of the next day with her, reading the letters of Keats
to her father, some of which were at that time unpublished, poring over torn
yellow leaves and faded scraps of paper, and wondering at the little Dante in
which Keats had written those marvellous notes on Milton. Some months
afterwards, when I was in California, I received a letter from Mrs. Speed
asking my acceptance of the original manuscript of the sonnet which I had
quoted in my lecture. This manuscript I have had reproduced here, as it seems
to me to possess much psychological interest. It shows us the conditions that
preceded the perfected form, the gradual growth, not of the conception but of
the expression, and the workings of that spirit of selection which is the secret
of style. In the case of poetry, as in the case of the other arts, what may appear
to be simply technicalities of method are in their essence spiritual not
mechanical, and although, in all lovely work, what concerns us is the ultimate
form, not the conditions that necessitate that form, yet the preference that
precedes perfection, the evolution of the beauty, and the mere making of the
music, have, if not their artistic value, at least their value to the artist.
It will be remembered that this sonnet was first published in 1848 by Lord
Houghton in his Life, Letters, and Literary Remains of John Keats. Lord
Houghton does not definitely state where he found it, but it was probably
among the Keats manuscripts belonging to Mr. Charles Brown. It is evidently
taken from a version later than that in my possession, as it accepts all the
corrections, and makes three variations. As in my manuscript the first line is
torn away, I give the sonnet here as it appears in Lord Houghton’s edition.
ANSWER TO A SONNET ENDING THUS:
Dark eyes are dearer far
Than those that make the hyacinthine bell.
By J. H. Reynolds.
Blue! ’Tis the life of heaven,—the domain
Of Cynthia,—the wide palace of the sun,—
The tent of Hesperus and all his train,—
The bosomer of clouds, gold, grey and dun.
Blue! ’Tis the life of waters—ocean
And all its vassal streams: pools numberless
May rage, and foam, and fret, but never can
Subside if not to dark-blue nativeness.
Blue! gentle cousin of the forest green,
Married to green in all the sweetest flowers,
Forget-me-not,—the blue-bell,—and, that queen
Of secrecy, the violet: what strange powers
Hast thou, as a mere shadow! But how great,
When in an Eye thou art alive with fate!
Feb. 1818.
In the Athenæum of the 3rd of June 1876 appeared a letter from Mr. A. J.
Horwood, stating that he had in his possession a copy of The Garden of
Florence in which this sonnet was transcribed. Mr. Horwood, who was
unaware that the sonnet had been already published by Lord Houghton, gives
the transcript at length. His version reads hue for life in the first line, and
bright for wide in the second, and gives the sixth line thus:
With all his tributary streams, pools numberless,
a foot too long: it also reads to for of in the ninth line. Mr. Buxton Forman
is of opinion that these variations are decidedly genuine, but indicative of an
earlier state of the poem than that adopted in Lord Houghton’s edition.
However, now that we have before us Keats’s first draft of his sonnet, it is
difficult to believe that the sixth line in Mr. Horwood’s version is really a
genuine variation. Keats may have written,
Ocean
His tributary streams, pools numberless,
and the transcript may have been carelessly made, but having got his line
right in his first draft, Keats probably did not spoil it in his second. The
Athenæum version inserts a comma after art in the last line, which seems to
me a decided improvement, and eminently characteristic of Keats’s method. I
am glad to see that Mr. Buxton Forman has adopted it.
As for the corrections that Lord Houghton’s version shows Keats to have
made in the eighth and ninth lines of this sonnet, it is evident that they sprang
from Keats’s reluctance to repeat the same word in consecutive lines, except in
cases where a word’s music or meaning was to be emphasized. The
substitution of ‘its’ for ‘his’ in the sixth line is more difficult of explanation. It
was due probably to a desire on Keats’s part not to mar by any echo the fine
personification of Hesperus.
It may be noticed that Keats’s own eyes were brown, and not blue, as
stated by Mrs. Proctor to Lord Houghton. Mrs. Speed showed me a note to
that effect written by Mrs. George Keats on the margin of the page in Lord
Houghton’s Life (p. 100, vol. i.), where Mrs. Proctor’s description is given.
Cowden Clarke made a similar correction in his Recollections, and in some of
the later editions of Lord Houghton’s book the word ‘blue’ is struck out. In
Severn’s portraits of Keats also the eyes are given as brown.
The exquisite sense of colour expressed in the ninth and tenth lines may be
paralleled by
The Ocean with its vastness, its blue green,
of the sonnet to George Keats.
DINNERS AND DISHES
(Pall Mall Gazette, March 7, 1885.)
A man can live for three days without bread, but no man can live for one
day without poetry, was an aphorism of Baudelaire. You can live without
pictures and music but you cannot live without eating, says the author of
Dinners and Dishes; and this latter view is, no doubt, the more popular. Who,
indeed, in these degenerate days would hesitate between an ode and an
omelette, a sonnet and a salmis? Yet the position is not entirely Philistine;
cookery is an art; are not its principles the subject of South Kensington
lectures, and does not the Royal Academy give a banquet once a year?
Besides, as the coming democracy will, no doubt, insist on feeding us all on
penny dinners, it is well that the laws of cookery should be explained: for were
the national meal burned, or badly seasoned, or served up with the wrong
sauce a dreadful revolution might follow.
Under these circumstances we strongly recommend Dinners and Dishes to
every one: it is brief and concise and makes no attempt at eloquence, which is
extremely fortunate. For even on ortolans who could endure oratory? It also
has the advantage of not being illustrated. The subject of a work of art has, of
course, nothing to do with its beauty, but still there is always something
depressing about the coloured lithograph of a leg of mutton.
As regards the author’s particular views, we entirely agree with him on the
important question of macaroni. ‘Never,’ he says, ‘ask me to back a bill for a
man who has given me a macaroni pudding.’ Macaroni is essentially a savoury
dish and may be served with cheese or tomatoes but never with sugar and
milk. There is also a useful description of how to cook risotto—a delightful
dish too rarely seen in England; an excellent chapter on the different kinds of
salads, which should be carefully studied by those many hostesses whose
imaginations never pass beyond lettuce and beetroot; and actually a recipe for
making Brussels sprouts eatable. The last is, of course, a masterpiece.
The real difficulty that we all have to face in life is not so much the science
of cookery as the stupidity of cooks. And in this little handbook to practical
Epicureanism the tyrant of the English kitchen is shown in her proper light.
Her entire ignorance of herbs, her passion for extracts and essences, her total
inability to make a soup which is anything more than a combination of pepper
and gravy, her inveterate habit of sending up bread poultices with pheasants,—
all these sins and many others are ruthlessly unmasked by the author.
Ruthlessly and rightly. For the British cook is a foolish woman who should be
turned for her iniquities into a pillar of salt which she never knows how to use.
But our author is not local merely. He has been in many lands; he has eaten
back-hendl at Vienna and kulibatsch at St. Petersburg; he has had the courage
to face the buffalo veal of Roumania and to dine with a German family at one
o’clock; he has serious views on the right method of cooking those famous
white truffles of Turin of which Alexandre Dumas was so fond; and, in the
face of the Oriental Club, declares that Bombay curry is better than the curry
of Bengal. In fact he seems to have had experience of almost every kind of
meal except the ‘square meal’ of the Americans. This he should study at once;
there is a great field for the philosophic epicure in the United States. Boston
beans may be dismissed at once as delusions, but soft-shell crabs, terrapin,
canvas-back ducks, blue fish and the pompono of New Orleans are all
wonderful delicacies, particularly when one gets them at Delmonico’s. Indeed,
the two most remarkable bits of scenery in the States are undoubtedly
Delmonico’s and the Yosemité Valley; and the former place has done more to
promote a good feeling between England and America than anything else has
in this century.
We hope the ‘Wanderer’ will go there soon and add a chapter to Dinners
and Dishes, and that his book will have in England the influence it deserves.
There are twenty ways of cooking a potato and three hundred and sixty-five
ways of cooking an egg, yet the British cook, up to the present moment,
knows only three methods of sending up either one or the other.
SHAKESPEARE ON SCENERY
(Dramatic Review, March 14, 1885.)
I have often heard people wonder what Shakespeare would say, could he
see Mr. Irving’s production of his Much Ado About Nothing, or Mr. Wilson
Barrett’s setting of his Hamlet. Would he take pleasure in the glory of the
scenery and the marvel of the colour? Would he be interested in the Cathedral
of Messina, and the battlements of Elsinore? Or would he be indifferent, and
say the play, and the play only, is the thing?
Speculations like these are always pleasurable, and in the present case
happen to be profitable also. For it is not difficult to see what Shakespeare’s
attitude would be; not difficult, that is to say, if one reads Shakespeare himself,
instead of reading merely what is written about him.
Speaking, for instance, directly, as the manager of a London theatre,
through the lips of the chorus in Henry V., he complains of the smallness of
the stage on which he has to produce the pageant of a big historical play, and
of the want of scenery which obliges him to cut out many of its most
picturesque incidents, apologises for the scanty number of supers who had to
play the soldiers, and for the shabbiness of the properties, and, finally,
expresses his regret at being unable to bring on real horses.
In the Midsummer Night’s Dream, again, he gives us a most amusing
picture of the straits to which theatrical managers of his day were reduced by
the want of proper scenery. In fact, it is impossible to read him without seeing
that he is constantly protesting against the two special limitations of the
Elizabethan stage—the lack of suitable scenery, and the fashion of men
playing women’s parts, just as he protests against other difficulties with which
managers of theatres have still to contend, such as actors who do not
understand their words; actors who miss their cues; actors who overact their
parts; actors who mouth; actors who gag; actors who play to the gallery, and
amateur actors.
And, indeed, a great dramatist, as he was, could not but have felt very
much hampered at being obliged continually to interrupt the progress of a play
in order to send on some one to explain to the audience that the scene was to
be changed to a particular place on the entrance of a particular character, and
after his exit to somewhere else; that the stage was to represent the deck of a
ship in a storm, or the interior of a Greek temple, or the streets of a certain
town, to all of which inartistic devices Shakespeare is reduced, and for which
he always amply apologizes. Besides this clumsy method, Shakespeare had
two other substitutes for scenery—the hanging out of a placard, and his
descriptions. The first of these could hardly have satisfied his passion for
picturesqueness and his feeling for beauty, and certainly did not satisfy the
dramatic critic of his day. But as regards the description, to those of us who
look on Shakespeare not merely as a playwright but as a poet, and who enjoy
reading him at home just as much as we enjoy seeing him acted, it may be a
matter of congratulation that he had not at his command such skilled
machinists as are in use now at the Princess’s and at the Lyceum. For had
Cleopatra’s barge, for instance, been a structure of canvas and Dutch metal, it
would probably have been painted over or broken up after the withdrawal of
the piece, and, even had it survived to our own day, would, I am afraid, have
become extremely shabby by this time. Whereas now the beaten gold of its
poop is still bright, and the purple of its sails still beautiful; its silver oars are
not tired of keeping time to the music of the flutes they follow, nor the
Nereid’s flower-soft hands of touching its silken tackle; the mermaid still lies
at its helm, and still on its deck stand the boys with their coloured fans. Yet
lovely as all Shakespeare’s descriptive passages are, a description is in its
essence undramatic. Theatrical audiences are far more impressed by what they
look at than by what they listen to; and the modern dramatist, in having the
surroundings of his play visibly presented to the audience when the curtain
rises, enjoys an advantage for which Shakespeare often expresses his desire. It
is true that Shakespeare’s descriptions are not what descriptions are in modern
plays—accounts of what the audience can observe for themselves; they are the
imaginative method by which he creates in the mind of the spectators the
image of that which he desires them to see. Still, the quality of the drama is
action. It is always dangerous to pause for picturesqueness. And the
introduction of self-explanatory scenery enables the modern method to be far
more direct, while the loveliness of form and colour which it gives us, seems
to me often to create an artistic temperament in the audience, and to produce
that joy in beauty for beauty’s sake, without which the great masterpieces of
art can never be understood, to which, and to which only, are they ever
revealed.
To talk of the passion of a play being hidden by the paint, and of sentiment
being killed by scenery, is mere emptiness and folly of words. A noble play,
nobly mounted, gives us double artistic pleasure. The eye as well as the ear is
gratified, and the whole nature is made exquisitely receptive of the influence
of imaginative work. And as regards a bad play, have we not all seen large
audiences lured by the loveliness of scenic effect into listening to rhetoric
posing as poetry, and to vulgarity doing duty for realism? Whether this be
good or evil for the public I will not here discuss, but it is evident that the
playwright, at any rate, never suffers.
Indeed, the artist who really has suffered through the modern mounting of
plays is not the dramatist at all, but the scene-painter proper. He is rapidly
being displaced by the stage-carpenter. Now and then, at Drury Lane, I have
seen beautiful old front cloths let down, as perfect as pictures some of them,
and pure painter’s work, and there are many which we all remember at other
theatres, in front of which some dialogue was reduced to graceful dumb-show
through the hammer and tin-tacks behind. But as a rule the stage is
overcrowded with enormous properties, which are not merely far more
expensive and cumbersome than scene-paintings, but far less beautiful, and far
less true. Properties kill perspective. A painted door is more like a real door
than a real door is itself, for the proper conditions of light and shade can be
given to it; and the excessive use of built-up structures always makes the stage
too glaring, for as they have to be lit from behind, as well as from the front,
the gas-jets become the absolute light of the scene instead of the means merely
by which we perceive the conditions of light and shadow which the painter has
desired to show us.
So, instead of bemoaning the position of the playwright, it were better for
the critics to exert whatever influence they may possess towards restoring the
scene-painter to his proper position as an artist, and not allowing him to be
built over by the property man, or hammered to death by the carpenter. I have
never seen any reason myself why such artists as Mr. Beverley, Mr. Walter
Hann, and Mr. Telbin should not be entitled to become Academicians. They
have certainly as good a claim as have many of those R.A.’s whose total
inability to paint we can see every May for a shilling.
And lastly, let those critics who hold up for our admiration the simplicity
of the Elizabethan stage remember that they are lauding a condition of things
against which Shakespeare himself, in the spirit of a true artist, always
strongly protested.
HENRY THE FOURTH AT OXFORD
(Dramatic Review, May 23, 1885.)
I have been told that the ambition of every Dramatic Club is to act Henry
IV. I am not surprised. The spirit of comedy is as fervent in this play as is the
spirit of chivalry; it is an heroic pageant as well as an heroic poem, and like
most of Shakespeare’s historical dramas it contains an extraordinary number
of thoroughly good acting parts, each of which is absolutely individual in
character, and each of which contributes to the evolution of the plot.
To Oxford belongs the honour of having been the first to present on the
stage this noble play, and the production which I saw last week was in every
way worthy of that lovely town, that mother of sweetness and of light. For, in
spite of the roaring of the young lions at the Union, and the screaming of the
rabbits in the home of the vivisector, in spite of Keble College, and the
tramways, and the sporting prints, Oxford still remains the most beautiful
thing in England, and nowhere else are life and art so exquisitely blended, so
perfectly made one. Indeed, in most other towns art has often to present
herself in the form of a reaction against the sordid ugliness of ignoble lives,
but at Oxford she comes to us as an exquisite flower born of the beauty of life
and expressive of life’s joy. She finds her home by the Isis as once she did by
the Ilissus; the Magdalen walks and the Magdalen cloisters are as dear to her
as were ever the silver olives of Colonus and the golden gateway of the house
of Pallas: she covers with fanlike tracery the vaulted entrance to Christ Church
Hall, and looks out from the windows of Merton; her feet have stirred the
Cumnor cowslips, and she gathers fritillaries in the river-fields. To her the
clamour of the schools and the dullness of the lecture-room are a weariness
and a vexation of spirit; she seeks not to define virtue, and cares little for the
categories; she smiles on the swift athlete whose plastic grace has pleased her,
and rejoices in the young Barbarians at their games; she watches the rowers
from the reedy bank and gives myrtle to her lovers, and laurels to her poets,
and rue to those who talk wisely in the street; she makes the earth lovely to all
who dream with Keats; she opens high heaven to all who soar with Shelley;
and turning away her head from pedant, proctor and Philistine, she has
welcomed to her shrine a band of youthful actors, knowing that they have
sought with much ardour for the stern secret of Melpomene, and caught with
much gladness the sweet laughter of Thalia. And to me this ardour and this
gladness were the two most fascinating qualities of the Oxford performance,
as indeed they are qualities which are necessary to any fine dramatic
production. For without quick and imaginative observation of life the most
beautiful play becomes dull in presentation, and what is not conceived in
delight by the actor can give no delight at all to others.
I know that there are many who consider that Shakespeare is more for the
study than for the stage. With this view I do not for a moment agree.
Shakespeare wrote the plays to be acted, and we have no right to alter the form
which he himself selected for the full expression of his work. Indeed, many of
the beauties of that work can be adequately conveyed to us only through the
actor’s art. As I sat in the Town Hall of Oxford the other night, the majesty of
the mighty lines of the play seemed to me to gain new music from the clear
young voices that uttered them, and the ideal grandeur of the heroism to be
made more real to the spectators by the chivalrous bearing, the noble gesture
and the fine passion of its exponents. Even the dresses had their dramatic
value. Their archæological accuracy gave us, immediately on the rise of the
curtain, a perfect picture of the time. As the knights and nobles moved across
the stage in the flowing robes of peace and in the burnished steel of battle, we
needed no dreary chorus to tell us in what age or land the play’s action was
passing, for the fifteenth century in all the dignity and grace of its apparel was
living actually before us, and the delicate harmonies of colour struck from the
first a dominant note of beauty which added to the intellectual realism of
archæology the sensuous charm of art.
I have rarely seen a production better stage-managed. Indeed, I hope that
the University will take some official notice of this delightful work of art.
Why should not degrees be granted for good acting? Are they not given to
those who misunderstand Plato and who mistranslate Aristotle? And should
the artist be passed over? No. To Prince Hal, Hotspur and Falstaff, D.C.L.’s
should be gracefully offered. I feel sure they would be gracefully accepted. To
the rest of the company the crimson or the sheepskin hood might be assigned
honoris causâ to the eternal confusion of the Philistine, and the rage of the
industrious and the dull. Thus would Oxford confer honour on herself, and the
artist be placed in his proper position. However, whether or not Convocation
recognizes the claims of culture, I hope that the Oxford Dramatic Society will
produce every summer for us some noble play like Henry IV. For, in plays of
this kind, plays which deal with bygone times, there is always this peculiar
charm, that they combine in one exquisite presentation the passions that are
living with the picturesqueness that is dead. And when we have the modern
spirit given to us in an antique form, the very remoteness of that form can be
made a method of increased realism. This was Shakespeare’s own attitude
towards the ancient world, this is the attitude we in this century should adopt
towards his plays, and with a feeling akin to this it seemed to me that these
brilliant young Oxonians were working. If it was so, their aim is the right one.
For while we look to the dramatist to give romance to realism, we ask of the
actor to give realism to romance.
A HANDBOOK TO MARRIAGE
(Pall Mall Gazette, November 18, 1885.)
In spite of its somewhat alarming title this book may be highly
recommended to every one. As for the authorities the author quotes, they are
almost numberless, and range from Socrates down to Artemus Ward. He tells
us of the wicked bachelor who spoke of marriage as ‘a very harmless
amusement’ and advised a young friend of his to ‘marry early and marry
often’; of Dr. Johnson who proposed that marriage should be arranged by the
Lord Chancellor, without the parties concerned having any choice in the
matter; of the Sussex labourer who asked, ‘Why should I give a woman half
my victuals for cooking the other half?’ and of Lord Verulam who thought that
unmarried men did the best public work. And, indeed, marriage is the one
subject on which all women agree and all men disagree. Our author, however,
is clearly of the same opinion as the Scotch lassie who, on her father warning
her what a solemn thing it was to get married, answered, ‘I ken that, father, but
it’s a great deal solemner to be single.’ He may be regarded as the champion of
the married life. Indeed, he has a most interesting chapter on marriage-made
men, and though he dissents, and we think rightly, from the view recently put
forward by a lady or two on the Women’s Rights platform that Solomon owed
all his wisdom to the number of his wives, still he appeals to Bismarck, John
Stuart Mill, Mahommed, and Lord Beaconsfield, as instances of men whose
success can be traced to the influence of the women they married. Archbishop
Whately once defined woman as ‘a creature that does not reason and pokes the
fire from the top,’ but since his day the higher education of women has
considerably altered their position. Women have always had an emotional
sympathy with those they love; Girton and Newnham have rendered
intellectual sympathy also possible. In our day it is best for a man to be
married, and men must give up the tyranny in married life which was once so
dear to them, and which, we are afraid, lingers still, here and there.
‘Do you wish to be my wife, Mabel?’ said a little boy. ‘Yes,’ incautiously
answered Mabel. ‘Then pull off my boots.’
On marriage vows our author has, too, very sensible views and very
amusing stories. He tells of a nervous bridegroom who, confusing the
baptismal and marriage ceremonies, replied when asked if he consented to
take the bride for his wife: ‘I renounce them all’; of a Hampshire rustic who,
when giving the ring, said solemnly to the bride: ‘With my body I thee wash
up, and with all my hurdle goods I thee and thou’; of another who when asked
whether he would take his partner to be his wedded wife, replied with
shameful indecision: ‘Yes, I’m willin’; but I’d a sight rather have her sister’;
and of a Scotch lady who, on the occasion of her daughter’s wedding, was
asked by an old friend whether she might congratulate her on the event, and
answered: ‘Yes, yes, upon the whole it is very satisfactory; it is true Jeannie
hates her gudeman, but then there’s always a something!’ Indeed, the good
stories contained in this book are quite endless and make it very pleasant
reading, while the good advice is on all points admirable.
Most young married people nowadays start in life with a dreadful
collection of ormolu inkstands covered with sham onyxes, or with a perfect
museum of salt-cellars. We strongly recommend this book as one of the best of
wedding presents. It is a complete handbook to an earthly Paradise, and its
author may be regarded as the Murray of matrimony and the Baedeker of bliss.
TO READ OR NOT TO READ
(Pall Mall Gazette, February 8, 1886.)
Books, I fancy, may be conveniently divided into three classes:
1. Books to read, such as Cicero’s Letters, Suetonius, Vasari’s Lives of the
Painters, the Autobiography of Benvenuto Cellini, Sir John Mandeville, Marco
Polo, St. Simon’s Memoirs, Mommsen, and (till we get a better one) Grote’s
History of Greece.
2. Books to re-read, such as Plato and Keats: in the sphere of poetry, the
masters not the minstrels; in the sphere of philosophy, the seers not the
savants.
3. Books not to read at all, such as Thomson’s Seasons, Rogers’s Italy,
Paley’s Evidences, all the Fathers except St. Augustine, all John Stuart Mill
except the essay on Liberty, all Voltaire’s plays without any exception,
Butler’s Analogy, Grant’s Aristotle, Hume’s England, Lewes’s History of
Philosophy, all argumentative books and all books that try to prove anything.
The third class is by far the most important. To tell people what to read is,
as a rule, either useless or harmful; for, the appreciation of literature is a
question of temperament not of teaching; to Parnassus there is no primer and
nothing that one can learn is ever worth learning. But to tell people what not to
read is a very different matter, and I venture to recommend it as a mission to
the University Extension Scheme.
Indeed, it is one that is eminently needed in this age of ours, an age that
reads so much, that it has no time to admire, and writes so much, that it has no
time to think. Whoever will select out of the chaos of our modern curricula
‘The Worst Hundred Books,’ and publish a list of them, will confer on the
rising generation a real and lasting benefit.
After expressing these views I suppose I should not offer any suggestions
at all with regard to ‘The Best Hundred Books,’ but I hope you will allow me
the pleasure of being inconsistent, as I am anxious to put in a claim for a book
that has been strangely omitted by most of the excellent judges who have
contributed to your columns. I mean the Greek Anthology. The beautiful
poems contained in this collection seem to me to hold the same position with
regard to Greek dramatic literature as do the delicate little figurines of Tanagra
to the Phidian marbles, and to be quite as necessary for the complete
understanding of the Greek spirit.
I am also amazed to find that Edgar Allan Poe has been passed over. Surely
this marvellous lord of rhythmic expression deserves a place? If, in order to
make room for him, it be necessary to elbow out some one else, I should
elbow out Southey, and I think that Baudelaire might be most advantageously
substituted for Keble.
No doubt, both in the Curse of Kehama and in the Christian Year there are
poetic qualities of a certain kind, but absolute catholicity of taste is not without
its dangers. It is only an auctioneer who should admire all schools of art.
THE LETTERS OF A GREAT WOMAN
(Pall Mall Gazette, March 6, 1886.)
Of the many collections of letters that have appeared in this century few, if
any, can rival for fascination of style and variety of incident the letters of
George Sand which have recently been translated into English by M. Ledos de
Beaufort. They extend over a space of more than sixty years, from 1812 to
1876, in fact, and comprise the first letters of Aurore Dupin, a child of eight
years old, as well as the last letters of George Sand, a woman of seventy-two.
The very early letters, those of the child and of the young married woman,
possess, of course, merely a psychological interest; but from 1831, the date of
Madame Dudevant’s separation from her husband and her first entry into Paris
life, the interest becomes universal, and the literary and political history of
France is mirrored in every page.
For George Sand was an indefatigable correspondent; she longs in one of
her letters, it is true, for ‘a planet where reading and writing are absolutely
unknown,’ but still she had a real pleasure in letter-writing. Her greatest
delight was the communication of ideas, and she is always in the heart of the
battle. She discusses pauperism with Louis Napoleon in his prison at Ham, and
liberty with Armand Barbes in his dungeon at Vincennes; she writes to
Lamennais on philosophy, to Mazzini on socialism, to Lamartine on
democracy, and to Ledru-Rollin on justice. Her letters reveal to us not merely
the life of a great novelist but the soul of a great woman, of a woman who was
one with all the noblest movements of her day and whose sympathy with
humanity was boundless absolutely. For the aristocracy of intellect she had
always the deepest veneration, but the democracy of suffering touched her
more. She preached the regeneration of mankind, not with the noisy ardour of
the paid advocate, but with the enthusiasm of the true evangelist. Of all the
artists of this century she was the most altruistic; she felt every one’s
misfortunes except her own. Her faith never left her; to the end of her life, as
she tells us, she was able to believe without illusions. But the people
disappointed her a little. She saw that they followed persons not principles,
and for ‘the great man theory’ George Sand had no respect. ‘Proper names are
the enemies of principles’ is one of her aphorisms.
So from 1850 her letters are more distinctly literary. She discusses modern
realism with Flaubert, and play-writing with Dumas fils; and protests with
passionate vehemence against the doctrine of L’art pour l’art. ‘Art for the sake
of itself is an idle sentence,’ she writes; ‘art for the sake of truth, for the sake
of what is beautiful and good, that is the creed I seek.’ And in a delightful
letter to M. Charles Poncy she repeats the same idea very charmingly. ‘People
say that birds sing for the sake of singing, but I doubt it. They sing their loves
and happiness, and in that they are in keeping with nature. But man must do
something more, and poets only sing in order to move people and to make
them think.’ She wanted M. Poncy to be the poet of the people and, if good
advice were all that had been needed, he would certainly have been the Burns
of the workshop. She drew out a delightful scheme for a volume to be called
Songs of all Trades and saw the possibilities of making handicrafts poetic.
Perhaps she valued good intentions in art a little too much, and she hardly
understood that art for art’s sake is not meant to express the final cause of art
but is merely a formula of creation; but, as she herself had scaled Parnassus,
we must not quarrel at her bringing Proletarianism with her. For George Sand
must be ranked among our poetic geniuses. She regarded the novel as still
within the domain of poetry. Her heroes are not dead photographs; they are
great possibilities. Modern novels are dissections; hers are dreams. ‘I make
popular types,’ she writes, ‘such as I do no longer see, but such as they should
and might be.’ For realism, in M. Zola’s acceptation of the word, she had no
admiration. Art to her was a mirror that transfigured truths but did not
represent realities. Hence she could not understand art without personality. ‘I
am aware,’ she writes to Flaubert, ‘that you are opposed to the exposition of
personal doctrine in literature. Are you right? Does not your opposition
proceed rather from a want of conviction than from a principle of æsthetics? If
we have any philosophy in our brain it must needs break forth in our writings.
But you, as soon as you handle literature, you seem anxious, I know not why,
to be another man, the one who must disappear, who annihilates himself and is
no more. What a singular mania! What a deficient taste! The worth of our
productions depends entirely on our own. Besides, if we withhold our own
opinions respecting the personages we create, we naturally leave the reader in
uncertainty as to the opinion he should himself form of them. That amounts to
wishing not to be understood, and the result of this is that the reader gets
weary of us and leaves us.’
She herself, however, may be said to have suffered from too dominant a
personality, and this was the reason of the failure of most of her plays.
Of the drama in the sense of disinterested presentation she had no idea, and
what is the strength and life-blood of her novels is the weakness of her
dramatic works. But in the main she was right. Art without personality is
impossible. And yet the aim of art is not to reveal personality, but to please.
This she hardly recognized in her æsthetics, though she realized it in her work.
On literary style she has some excellent remarks. She dislikes the
extravagances of the romantic school and sees the beauty of simplicity.
‘Simplicity,’ she writes, ‘is the most difficult thing to secure in this world: it is
the last limit of experience and the last effort of genius.’ She hated the slang
and argot of Paris life, and loved the words used by the peasants in the
provinces. ‘The provinces,’ she remarks, ‘preserve the tradition of the original
tongue and create but few new words. I feel much respect for the language of
the peasantry; in my estimation it is the more correct.’
She thought Flaubert too much preoccupied with the sense of form, and
makes these excellent observations to him—perhaps her best piece of literary
criticism. ‘You consider the form as the aim, whereas it is but the effect.
Happy expressions are only the outcome of emotion and emotion itself
proceeds from a conviction. We are only moved by that which we ardently
believe in.’ Literary schools she distrusted. Individualism was to her the
keystone of art as well as of life. ‘Do not belong to any school: do not imitate
any model,’ is her advice. Yet she never encouraged eccentricity. ‘Be correct,’
she writes to Eugène Pelletan, ‘that is rarer than being eccentric, as the time
goes. It is much more common to please by bad taste than to receive the cross
of honour.’
On the whole, her literary advice is sound and healthy. She never shrieks
and she never sneers. She is the incarnation of good sense. And the whole
collection of her letters is a perfect treasure-house of suggestions both on art
and on politics.
BÉRANGER IN ENGLAND
(Pall Mall Gazette, April 21, 1886.)
A philosophic politician once remarked that the best possible form of
government is an absolute monarchy tempered by street ballads.
Without at all agreeing with this aphorism we still cannot but regret that
the new democracy does not use poetry as a means for the expression of
political opinion. The Socialists, it is true, have been heard singing the later
poems of Mr. William Morris, but the street ballad is really dead in England.
The fact is that most modern poetry is so artificial in its form, so individual in
its essence and so literary in its style, that the people as a body are little moved
by it, and when they have grievances against the capitalist or the aristocrat
they prefer strikes to sonnets and rioting to rondels.
Possibly, Mr. William Toynbee’s pleasant little volume of translations from
Béranger may be the herald of a new school. Béranger had all the
qualifications for a popular poet. He wrote to be sung more than to be read; he
preferred the Pont Neuf to Parnassus; he was patriotic as well as romantic, and
humorous as well as humane. Translations of poetry as a rule are merely
misrepresentations, but the muse of Béranger is so simple and naïve that she
can wear our English dress with ease and grace, and Mr. Toynbee has kept
much of the mirth and music of the original. Here and there, undoubtedly, the
translation could be improved upon; ‘rapiers’ for instance is an abominable
rhyme to ‘forefathers’; ‘the hated arms of Albion’ in the same poem is a very
feeble rendering of ‘le léopard de l’Anglais,’ and such a verse as
’Mid France’s miracles of art,
Rare trophies won from art’s own land,
I’ve lived to see with burning heart
The fog-bred poor triumphant stand,
reproduces very inadequately the charm of the original:
Dans nos palais, où, près de la victoire,
Brillaient les arts, doux fruits des beaux climats,
J’ai vu du Nord les peuplades sans gloire,
De leurs manteaux secouer les frimas.
On the whole, however, Mr. Toynbee’s work is good; Les Champs, for
example, is very well translated, and so are the two delightful poems Rosette
and Ma République; and there is a good deal of spirit in Le Marquis de
Carabas:
Whom have we here in conqueror’s rôle?
Our grand old marquis, bless his soul!
Whose grand old charger (mark his bone!)
Has borne him back to claim his own.
Note, if you please, the grand old style
In which he nears his grand old pile;
With what an air of grand old state
He waves that blade immaculate!
Hats off, hats off, for my lord to pass,
The grand old Marquis of Carabas!—
though ‘that blade immaculate’ has hardly got the sting of ‘un sabre
innocent’; and in the fourth verse of the same poem, ‘Marquise, you’ll have
the bed-chamber’ does not very clearly convey the sense of the line ‘La
Marquise a le tabouret.’ Béranger is not nearly well enough known in England,
and though it is always better to read a poet in the original, still translations
have their value as echoes have their music.
THE POETRY OF THE PEOPLE
(Pall Mall Gazette, May 13, 1886.)
The Countess Martinengo deserves well of all poets, peasants and
publishers. Folk-lore is so often treated nowadays merely from the point of
view of the comparative mythologist, that it is really delightful to come across
a book that deals with the subject simply as literature. For the Folk-tale is the
father of all fiction as the Folk-song is the mother of all poetry; and in the
games, the tales and the ballads of primitive people it is easy to see the germs
of such perfected forms of art as the drama, the novel and the epic. It is, of
course, true that the highest expression of life is to be found not in the popular
songs, however poetical, of any nation, but in the great masterpieces of selfconscious Art; yet it is pleasant sometimes to leave the summit of Parnassus to
look at the wildflowers in the valley, and to turn from the lyre of Apollo to
listen to the reed of Pan. We can still listen to it. To this day, the vineyard
dressers of Calabria will mock the passer-by with satirical verses as they used
to do in the old pagan days, and the peasants of the olive woods of Provence
answer each other in amœbæan strains. The Sicilian shepherd has not yet
thrown his pipe aside, and the children of modern Greece sing the swallowsong through the villages in spring-time, though Theognis is more than two
thousand years dead. Nor is this popular poetry merely the rhythmic
expression of joy and sorrow; it is in the highest degree imaginative; and
taking its inspiration directly from nature it abounds in realistic metaphor and
in picturesque and fantastic imagery. It must, of course, be admitted that there
is a conventionality of nature as there is a conventionality of art, and that
certain forms of utterance are apt to become stereotyped by too constant use;
yet, on the whole, it is impossible not to recognize in the Folk-songs that the
Countess Martinengo has brought together one strong dominant note of
fervent and flawless sincerity. Indeed, it is only in the more terrible dramas of
the Elizabethan age that we can find any parallel to the Corsican voceri with
their shrill intensity of passion, their awful frenzies of grief and hate. And yet,
ardent as the feeling is, the form is nearly always beautiful. Now and then, in
the poems of the extreme South one meets with a curious crudity of realism,
but, as a rule, the sense of beauty prevails.
Some of the Folk-poems in this book have all the lightness and loveliness
of lyrics, all of them have that sweet simplicity of pure song by which mirth
finds its own melody and mourning its own music, and even where there are
conceits of thought and expression they are conceits born of fancy not of
affectation. Herrick himself might have envied that wonderful love-song of
Provence:
If thou wilt be the falling dew
And fall on me alway,
Then I will be the white, white rose
On yonder thorny spray.
If thou wilt be the white, white rose
On yonder thorny spray,
Then I will be the honey-bee
And kiss thee all the day.
If thou wilt be the honey-bee
And kiss me all the day,
Then I will be in yonder heaven
The star of brightest ray.
If thou wilt be in yonder heaven
The star of brightest ray,
Then I will be the dawn, and we
Shall meet at break of day.
How charming also is this lullaby by which the Corsican mother sings her
babe to sleep!
Gold and pearls my vessel lade,
Silk and cloth the cargo be,
All the sails are of brocade
Coming from beyond the sea;
And the helm of finest gold,
Made a wonder to behold.
Fast awhile in slumber lie;
Sleep, my child, and hushaby.
After you were born full soon,
You were christened all aright;
Godmother she was the moon,
Godfather the sun so bright.
All the stars in heaven told
Wore their necklaces of gold.
Fast awhile in slumber lie;
Sleep, my child, and hushaby.
Or this from Roumania:
Sleep, my daughter, sleep an hour;
Mother’s darling gilliflower.
Mother rocks thee, standing near,
She will wash thee in the clear
Waters that from fountains run,
To protect thee from the sun.
Sleep, my darling, sleep an hour,
Grow thou as the gilliflower.
As a tear-drop be thou white,
As a willow tall and slight;
Gentle as the ring-doves are,
And be lovely as a star!
We hardly know what poems are sung to English babies, but we hope they
are as beautiful as these two. Blake might have written them.
The Countess Martinengo has certainly given us a most fascinating book.
In a volume of moderate dimensions, not too long to be tiresome nor too brief
to be disappointing, she has collected together the best examples of modern
Folk-songs, and with her as a guide the lazy reader lounging in his armchair
may wander from the melancholy pine-forests of the North to Sicily’s orangegroves and the pomegranate gardens of Armenia, and listen to the singing of
those to whom poetry is a passion, not a profession, and whose art, coming
from inspiration and not from schools, if it has the limitations, at least has also
the loveliness of its origin, and is one with blowing grasses and the flowers of
the field.
THE CENCI
(Dramatic Review, May 15, 1886.)
The production of The Cenci last week at the Grand Theatre, Islington,
may be said to have been an era in the literary history of this century, and the
Shelley Society deserves the highest praise and warmest thanks of all for
having given us an opportunity of seeing Shelley’s play under the conditions
he himself desired for it. For The Cenci was written absolutely with a view to
theatric presentation, and had Shelley’s own wishes been carried out it would
have been produced during his lifetime at Covent Garden, with Edmund Kean
and Miss O’Neill in the principal parts. In working out his conception, Shelley
had studied very carefully the æsthetics of dramatic art. He saw that the
essence of the drama is disinterested presentation, and that the characters must
not be merely mouthpieces for splendid poetry but must be living subjects for
terror and for pity. ‘I have endeavoured,’ he says, ‘as nearly as possible to
represent the characters as they probably were, and have sought to avoid the
error of making them actuated by my own conception of right or wrong, false
or true: thus under a thin veil converting names and actions of the sixteenth
century into cold impersonations of my own mind. . . .
‘I have avoided with great care the introduction of what is commonly
called mere poetry, and I imagine there will scarcely be found a detached
simile or a single isolated description, unless Beatrice’s description of the
chasm appointed for her father’s murder should be judged to be of that nature.’
He recognized that a dramatist must be allowed far greater freedom of
expression than what is conceded to a poet. ‘In a dramatic composition,’ to use
his own words, ‘the imagery and the passion should interpenetrate one
another, the former being reserved simply for the full development and
illustration of the latter. Imagination is as the immortal God which should
assume flesh for the redemption of mortal passion. It is thus that the most
remote and the most familiar imagery may alike be fit for dramatic purposes
when employed in the illustration of strong feeling, which raises what is low,
and levels to the apprehension that which is lofty, casting over all the shadow
of its own greatness. In other respects I have written more carelessly, that is,
without an over-fastidious and learned choice of words. In this respect I
entirely agree with those modern critics who assert that in order to move men
to true sympathy we must use the familiar language of men.’
He knew that if the dramatist is to teach at all it must be by example, not
by precept.
‘The highest moral purpose,’ he remarks, ‘aimed at in the highest species
of the drama, is the teaching the human heart, through its sympathies and
antipathies, the knowledge of itself; in proportion to the possession of which
knowledge every human being is wise, just, sincere, tolerant and kind. If
dogmas can do more it is well: but a drama is no fit place for the enforcement
of them.’ He fully realizes that it is by a conflict between our artistic
sympathies and our moral judgment that the greatest dramatic effects are
produced. ‘It is in the restless and anatomizing casuistry with which men seek
the justification of Beatrice, yet feel that she has done what needs justification;
it is in the superstitious horror with which they contemplate alike her wrongs
and their revenge, that the dramatic character of what she did and suffered
consists.’
In fact no one has more clearly understood than Shelley the mission of the
dramatist and the meaning of the drama.
BALZAC IN ENGLISH
(Pall Mall Gazette, September 13, 1886.)
Many years ago, in a number of All the Year Round, Charles Dickens
complained that Balzac was very little read in England, and although since
then the public has become more familiar with the great masterpieces of
French fiction, still it may be doubted whether the Comédie Humaine is at all
appreciated or understood by the general run of novel readers. It is really the
greatest monument that literature has produced in our century, and M. Taine
hardly exaggerates when he says that, after Shakespeare, Balzac is our most
important magazine of documents on human nature. Balzac’s aim, in fact, was
to do for humanity what Buffon had done for the animal creation. As the
naturalist studied lions and tigers, so the novelist studied men and women. Yet
he was no mere reporter. Photography and procès-verbal were not the
essentials of his method. Observation gave him the facts of life, but his genius
converted facts into truths, and truths into truth. He was, in a word, a
marvellous combination of the artistic temperament with the scientific spirit.
The latter he bequeathed to his disciples; the former was entirely his own. The
distinction between such a book as M. Zola’s L’Assommoir and such a book
as Balzac’s Illusions Perdues is the distinction between unimaginative realism
and imaginative reality. ‘All Balzac’s characters,’ said Baudelaire, ‘are gifted
with the same ardour of life that animated himself. All his fictions are as
deeply coloured as dreams. Every mind is a weapon loaded to the muzzle with
will. The very scullions have genius.’ He was, of course, accused of being
immoral. Few writers who deal directly with life escape that charge. His
answer to the accusation was characteristic and conclusive. ‘Whoever
contributes his stone to the edifice of ideas,’ he wrote, ‘whoever proclaims an
abuse, whoever sets his mark upon an evil to be abolished, always passes for
immoral. If you are true in your portraits, if, by dint of daily and nightly toil,
you succeed in writing the most difficult language in the world, the word
immoral is thrown in your face.’ The morals of the personages of the Comédie
Humaine are simply the morals of the world around us. They are part of the
artist’s subject-matter; they are not part of his method. If there be any need of
censure it is to life, not to literature, that it should be given. Balzac, besides, is
essentially universal. He sees life from every point of view. He has no
preferences and no prejudices. He does not try to prove anything. He feels that
the spectacle of life contains its own secret. ‘Il crée un monde et se tait.’
And what a world it is! What a panorama of passions! What a pell-mell of
men and women! It was said of Trollope that he increased the number of our
acquaintances without adding to our visiting list; but after the Comédie
Humaine one begins to believe that the only real people are the people who
never existed. Lucien de Rubempré, le Père Goriot, Ursule Mirouët,
Marguerite Claës, the Baron Hulot, Madame Marneffe, le Cousin Pons, De
Marsay—all bring with them a kind of contagious illusion of life. They have a
fierce vitality about them: their existence is fervent and fiery-coloured; we not
merely feel for them but we see them—they dominate our fancy and defy
scepticism. A steady course of Balzac reduces our living friends to shadows,
and our acquaintances to the shadows of shades. Who would care to go out to
an evening party to meet Tomkins, the friend of one’s boyhood, when one can
sit at home with Lucien de Rubempré? It is pleasanter to have the entrée to
Balzac’s society than to receive cards from all the duchesses in Mayfair.
In spite of this, there are many people who have declared the Comédie
Humaine to be indigestible. Perhaps it is: but then what about truffles?
Balzac’s publisher refused to be disturbed by any such criticism as that.
‘Indigestible, is it?’ he exclaimed with what, for a publisher, was rare good
sense. ‘Well, I should hope so; who ever thinks of a dinner that isn’t?’
BEN JONSON
(Pall Mall Gazette, September 20, 1886.)
As for Mr. Symonds’ estimate of Jonson’s genius, it is in many points quite
excellent. He ranks him with the giants rather than with the gods, with those
who compel our admiration by their untiring energy and huge strength of
intellectual muscle, not with those ‘who share the divine gifts of creative
imagination and inevitable instinct.’ Here he is right. Pelion more than
Parnassus was Jonson’s home. His art has too much effort about it, too much
definite intention. His style lacks the charm of chance. Mr. Symonds is right
also in the stress he lays on the extraordinary combination in Jonson’s work of
the most concentrated realism with encyclopædic erudition. In Jonson’s
comedies London slang and learned scholarship go hand in hand. Literature
was as living a thing to him as life itself. He used his classical lore not merely
to give form to his verse, but to give flesh and blood to the persons of his
plays. He could build up a breathing creature out of quotations. He made the
poets of Greece and Rome terribly modern, and introduced them to the oddest
company. His very culture is an element in his coarseness. There are moments
when one is tempted to liken him to a beast that has fed off books.
We cannot, however, agree with Mr. Symonds when he says that Jonson
‘rarely touched more than the outside of character,’ that his men and women
are ‘the incarnations of abstract properties rather than living human beings,’
that they are in fact mere ‘masqueraders and mechanical puppets.’ Eloquence
is a beautiful thing but rhetoric ruins many a critic, and Mr. Symonds is
essentially rhetorical. When, for instance, he tells us that ‘Jonson made
masks,’ while ‘Dekker and Heywood created souls,’ we feel that he is asking
us to accept a crude judgment for the sake of a smart antithesis. It is, of course,
true that we do not find in Jonson the same growth of character that we find in
Shakespeare, and we may admit that most of the characters in Jonson’s plays
are, so to speak, ready-made. But a ready-made character is not necessarily
either mechanical or wooden, two epithets Mr. Symonds uses constantly in his
criticism.
We cannot tell, and Shakespeare himself does not tell us, why Iago is evil,
why Regan and Goneril have hard hearts, or why Sir Andrew Aguecheek is a
fool. It is sufficient that they are what they are, and that nature gives warrant
for their existence. If a character in a play is lifelike, if we recognize it as true
to nature, we have no right to insist on the author explaining its genesis to us.
We must accept it as it is: and in the hands of a good dramatist mere
presentation can take the place of analysis, and indeed is often a more
dramatic method, because a more direct one. And Jonson’s characters are true
to nature. They are in no sense abstractions; they are types. Captain Bobadil
and Captain Tucca, Sir John Daw and Sir Amorous La Foole, Volpone and
Mosca, Subtle and Sir Epicure Mammon, Mrs. Purecraft and the Rabbi Busy
are all creatures of flesh and blood, none the less lifelike because they are
labelled. In this point Mr. Symonds seems to us unjust towards Jonson.
We think, also, that a special chapter might have been devoted to Jonson as
a literary critic. The creative activity of the English Renaissance is so great
that its achievements in the sphere of criticism are often overlooked by the
student. Then, for the first time, was language treated as an art. The laws of
expression and composition were investigated and formularized. The
importance of words was recognized. Romanticism, Realism and Classicism
fought their first battles. The dramatists are full of literary and art criticisms,
and amused the public with slashing articles on one another in the form of
plays.
MR. SYMONDS’ HISTORY OF THE RENAISSANCE
(Pall Mall Gazette, November 10, 1886.)
Mr. Symonds has at last finished his history of the Italian Renaissance. The
two volumes just published deal with the intellectual and moral conditions in
Italy during the seventy years of the sixteenth century which followed the
coronation of Charles the Fifth at Bologna, an era to which Mr. Symonds gives
the name of the Catholic Reaction, and they contain a most interesting and
valuable account of the position of Spain in the Italian peninsula, the conduct
of the Tridentine Council, the specific organization of the Holy Office and the
Company of Jesus, and the state of society upon which those forces were
brought to bear. In his previous volumes Mr. Symonds had regarded the past
rather as a picture to be painted than as a problem to be solved. In these two
last volumes, however, he shows a clearer appreciation of the office of history.
The art of the picturesque chronicler is completed by something like the
science of the true historian, the critical spirit begins to manifest itself, and life
is not treated as a mere spectacle, but the laws of its evolution and progress are
investigated also. We admit that the desire to represent life at all costs under
dramatic conditions still accompanies Mr. Symonds, and that he hardly
realizes that what seems romance to us was harsh reality to those who were
engaged in it. Like most dramatists, also, he is more interested in the
psychological exceptions than in the general rule. He has something of
Shakespeare’s sovereign contempt of the masses. The people stir him very
little, but he is fascinated by great personalities. Yet it is only fair to remember
that the age itself was one of exaggerated individualism, and that literature had
not yet become a mouthpiece for the utterances of humanity. Men appreciated
the aristocracy of intellect, but with the democracy of suffering they had no
sympathy. The cry from the brickfields had still to be heard. Mr. Symonds’
style, too, has much improved. Here and there, it is true, we come across
traces of the old manner, as in the apocalyptic vision of the seven devils that
entered Italy with the Spaniard, and the description of the Inquisition as a
Belial-Moloch, a ‘hideous idol whose face was blackened with soot from
burning human flesh.’ Such a sentence, also, as ‘over the Dead Sea of social
putrefaction floated the sickening oil of Jesuitical hypocrisy,’ reminds us that
rhetoric has not yet lost its charms for Mr. Symonds. Still, on the whole, the
style shows far more reserve, balance and sobriety, than can be found in the
earlier volumes where violent antithesis forms the predominant characteristic,
and accuracy is often sacrificed to an adjective.
Amongst the most interesting chapters of the book are those on the
Inquisition, on Sarpi, the great champion of the severance of Church from
State, and on Giordano Bruno. Indeed, the story of Bruno’s life, from his visit
to London and Oxford, his sojourn in Paris and wanderings through Germany,
down to his betrayal at Venice and martyrdom at Rome, is most powerfully
told, and the estimate of the value of his philosophy and the relation he holds
to modern science, is at once just and appreciative. The account also of
Ignatius Loyola and the rise of the Society of Jesus is extremely interesting,
though we cannot think that Mr. Symonds is very happy in his comparison of
the Jesuits to ‘fanatics laying stones upon a railway’ or ‘dynamiters blowing
up an emperor or a corner of Westminster Hall.’ Such a judgment is harsh and
crude in expression and more suitable to the clamour of the Protestant Union
than to the dignity of the true historian. Mr. Symonds, however, is rarely
deliberately unfair, and there is no doubt but that his work on the Catholic
Reaction is a most valuable contribution to modern history—so valuable,
indeed, that in the account he gives of the Inquisition in Venice it would be
well worth his while to bring the picturesque fiction of the text into some
harmony with the plain facts of the footnote.
On the poetry of the sixteenth century Mr. Symonds has, of course, a great
deal to say, and on such subjects he always writes with ease, grace, and
delicacy of perception. We admit that we weary sometimes of the continual
application to literature of epithets appropriate to plastic and pictorial art. The
conception of the unity of the arts is certainly of great value, but in the present
condition of criticism it seems to us that it would be more useful to emphasize
the fact that each art has its separate method of expression. The essay on
Tasso, however, is delightful reading, and the position the poet holds towards
modern music and modern sentiment is analysed with much subtlety. The
essay on Marino also is full of interest. We have often wondered whether those
who talk so glibly of Euphuism and Marinism in literature have ever read
either Euphues or the Adone. To the latter they can have no better guide than
Mr. Symonds, whose description of the poem is most fascinating. Marino, like
many greater men, has suffered much from his disciples, but he himself was a
master of graceful fancy and of exquisite felicity of phrase; not, of course, a
great poet but certainly an artist in poetry and one to whom language is
indebted. Even those conceits that Mr. Symonds feels bound to censure have
something charming about them. The continual use of periphrases is
undoubtedly a grave fault in style, yet who but a pedant would really quarrel
with such periphrases as sirena de’ boschi for the nightingale, or il novello
Edimione for Galileo?
From the poets Mr. Symonds passes to the painters: not those great artists
of Florence and Venice of whom he has already written, but the Eclectics of
Bologna, the Naturalists of Naples and Rome. This chapter is too polemical to
be pleasant. The one on music is much better, and Mr. Symonds gives us a
most interesting description of the gradual steps by which the Italian genius
passed from poetry and painting to melody and song, till the whole of Europe
thrilled with the marvel and mystery of this new language of the soul. Some
small details should perhaps be noticed. It is hardly accurate, for instance, to
say that Monteverde’s Orfeo was the first form of the recitative-Opera, as
Peri’s Dafne and Euridice and Cavaliere’s Rappresentazione preceded it by
some years, and it is somewhat exaggerated to say that ‘under the regime of
the Commonwealth the national growth of English music received a check
from which it never afterwards recovered,’ as it was with Cromwell’s auspices
that the first English Opera was produced, thirteen years before any Opera was
regularly established in Paris. The fact that England did not make such
development in music as Italy and Germany did, must be ascribed to other
causes than ‘the prevalence of Puritan opinion.’
These, however, are minor points. Mr. Symonds is to be warmly
congratulated on the completion of his history of the Renaissance in Italy. It is
a most wonderful monument of literary labour, and its value to the student of
Humanism cannot be doubted. We have often had occasion to differ from Mr.
Symonds on questions of detail, and we have more than once felt it our duty to
protest against the rhetoric and over-emphasis of his style, but we fully
recognize the importance of his work and the impetus he has given to the
study of one of the vital periods of the world’s history. Mr. Symonds’ learning
has not made him a pedant; his culture has widened not narrowed his
sympathies, and though he can hardly be called a great historian, yet he will
always occupy a place in English literature as one of the remarkable men of
letters in the nineteenth century.
MR. MORRIS’S ODYSSEY
(Pall Mall Gazette, April 26, 1887.)
Of all our modern poets, Mr. William Morris is the one best qualified by
nature and by art to translate for us the marvellous epic of the wanderings of
Odysseus. For he is our only true story-singer since Chaucer; if he is a
Socialist, he is also a Saga-man; and there was a time when he was never
wearied of telling us strange legends of gods and men, wonderful tales of
chivalry and romance. Master as he is of decorative and descriptive verse, he
has all the Greek’s joy in the visible aspect of things, all the Greek’s sense of
delicate and delightful detail, all the Greek’s pleasure in beautiful textures and
exquisite materials and imaginative designs; nor can any one have a keener
sympathy with the Homeric admiration for the workers and the craftsmen in
the various arts, from the stainers in white ivory and the embroiderers in
purple and gold, to the weaver sitting by the loom and the dyer dipping in the
vat, the chaser of shield and helmet, the carver of wood or stone. And to all
this is added the true temper of high romance, the power to make the past as
real to us as the present, the subtle instinct to discern passion, the swift
impulse to portray life.
It is no wonder the lovers of Greek literature have so eagerly looked
forward to Mr. Morris’s version of the Odyssean epic, and now that the first
volume has appeared, it is not extravagant to say that of all our English
translations this is the most perfect and the most satisfying. In spite of
Coleridge’s well-known views on the subject, we have always held that
Chapman’s Odyssey is immeasurably inferior to his Iliad, the mere difference
of metre alone being sufficient to set the former in a secondary place; Pope’s
Odyssey, with its glittering rhetoric and smart antithesis, has nothing of the
grand manner of the original; Cowper is dull, and Bryant dreadful, and
Worsley too full of Spenserian prettinesses; while excellent though Messrs.
Butcher and Lang’s version undoubtedly is in many respects, still, on the
whole, it gives us merely the facts of the Odyssey without providing anything
of its artistic effect. Avia’s translation even, though better than almost all its
predecessors in the same field, is not worthy of taking rank beside Mr.
Morris’s, for here we have a true work of art, a rendering not merely of
language into language, but of poetry into poetry, and though the new spirit
added in the transfusion may seem to many rather Norse than Greek, and,
perhaps at times, more boisterous than beautiful, there is yet a vigour of life in
every line, a splendid ardour through each canto, that stirs the blood while one
reads like the sound of a trumpet, and that, producing a physical as well as a
spiritual delight, exults the senses no less than it exalts the soul. It may be
admitted at once that, here and there, Mr. Morris has missed something of the
marvellous dignity of the Homeric verse, and that, in his desire for rushing and
ringing metre, he has occasionally sacrificed majesty to movement, and made
stateliness give place to speed; but it is really only in such blank verse as
Milton’s that this effect of calm and lofty music can be attained, and in all
other respects blank verse is the most inadequate medium for reproducing the
full flow and fervour of the Greek hexameter. One merit, at any rate, Mr.
Morris’s version entirely and absolutely possesses. It is, in no sense of the
word, literary; it seems to deal immediately with life itself, and to take from
the reality of things its own form and colour; it is always direct and simple,
and at its best has something of the ‘large utterance of the early gods.’
As for individual passages of beauty, nothing could be better than the
wonderful description of the house of the Phœacian king, or the whole telling
of the lovely legend of Circe, or the manner in which the pageant of the pale
phantoms in Hades is brought before our eyes. Perhaps the huge epic humour
of the escape from the Cyclops is hardly realized, but there is always a
linguistic difficulty about rendering this fascinating story into English, and
where we are given so much poetry we should not complain about losing a
pun; and the exquisite idyll of the meeting and parting with the daughter of
Alcinous is really delightfully told. How good, for instance, is this passage
taken at random from the Sixth Book:
But therewith unto the handmaids goodly Odysseus spake:
‘Stand off I bid you, damsels, while the work in hand I take,
And wash the brine from my shoulders, and sleek them all around.
Since verily now this long while sweet oil they have not found.
But before you nought will I wash me, for shame I have indeed,
Amidst of fair-tressed damsels to be all bare of weed.’
So he spake and aloof they gat them, and thereof they told the may,
But Odysseus with the river from his body washed away
The brine from his back and shoulders wrought broad and mightily,
And from his head was he wiping the foam of the untilled sea;
But when he had thoroughly washed him, and the oil about him had shed,
He did upon the raiment the gift of the maid unwed.
But Athene, Zeus-begotten, dealt with him in such wise
That bigger yet was his seeming, and mightier to all eyes,
With the hair on his head crisp curling as the bloom of the daffodil.
And as when the silver with gold is o’erlaid by a man of skill,
Yea, a craftsman whom Hephæstus and Pallas Athene have taught
To be master over masters, and lovely work he hath wrought;
So she round his head and his shoulders shed grace abundantly.
It may be objected by some that the line
With the hair on his head crisp curling as the bloom of the daffodil,
is a rather fanciful version of
ουλας ηκε κομας, ύακινθίνω ανθει ομοιασ
and it certainly seems probable that the allusion is to the dark colour of the
hero’s hair; still, the point is not one of much importance, though it may be
worth noting that a similar expression occurs in Ogilby’s superbly illustrated
translation of the Odyssey, published in 1665, where Charles ii.’s Master of
the Revels in Ireland gives the passage thus:
Minerva renders him more tall and fair,
Curling in rings like daffodils his hair.
No anthology, however, can show the true merit of Mr. Morris’s
translation, whose real merit does not depend on stray beauties, nor is revealed
by chance selections, but lies in the absolute rightness and coherence of the
whole, in its purity and justice of touch, its freedom from affectation and
commonplace, its harmony of form and matter. It is sufficient to say that this is
a poet’s version of a poet, and for such surely we should be thankful. In these
latter days of coarse and vulgar literature, it is something to have made the
great sea-epic of the South native and natural to our northern isle, something
to have shown that our English speech may be a pipe through which Greek
lips can blow, something to have taught Nausicaa to speak the same language
as Perdita.
RUSSIAN NOVELISTS
(Pall Mall Gazette, May 2, 1887.)
Of the three great Russian novelists of our time Tourgenieff is by far the
finest artist. He has that spirit of exquisite selection, that delicate choice of
detail, which is the essence of style; his work is entirely free from any
personal intention; and by taking existence at its most fiery-coloured moments
he can distil into a few pages of perfect prose the moods and passions of many
lives.
Count Tolstoi’s method is much larger, and his field of vision more
extended. He reminds us sometimes of Paul Veronese, and, like that great
painter, can crowd, without over-crowding, the giant canvas on which he
works. We may not at first gain from his works that artistic unity of impression
which is Tourgenieff’s chief charm, but once that we have mastered the details
the whole seems to have the grandeur and the simplicity of an epic.
Dostoieffski differs widely from both his rivals. He is not so fine an artist as
Tourgenieff, for he deals more with the facts than with the effects of life; nor
has he Tolstoi’s largeness of vision and epic dignity; but he has qualities that
are distinctively and absolutely his own, such as a fierce intensity of passion
and concentration of impulse, a power of dealing with the deepest mysteries of
psychology and the most hidden springs of life, and a realism that is pitiless in
its fidelity, and terrible because it is true. Some time ago we had occasion to
draw attention to his marvellous novel Crime and Punishment, where in the
haunt of impurity and vice a harlot and an assassin meet together to read the
story of Dives and Lazarus, and the outcast girl leads the sinner to make
atonement for his sin; nor is the book entitled Injury and Insult at all inferior to
that great masterpiece. Mean and ordinary though the surroundings of the
story may seem, the heroine Natasha is like one of the noble victims of Greek
tragedy; she is Antigone with the passion of Phædra, and it is impossible to
approach her without a feeling of awe. Greek also is the gloom of Nemesis
that hangs over each character, only it is a Nemesis that does not stand outside
of life, but is part of our own nature and of the same material as life itself.
Aleósha, the beautiful young lad whom Natasha follows to her doom, is a
second Tito Melema, and has all Tito’s charm and grace and fascination. Yet
he is different. He would never have denied Baldassare in the Square at
Florence, nor lied to Romola about Tessa. He has a magnificent, momentary
sincerity, a boyish unconsciousness of all that life signifies, an ardent
enthusiasm for all that life cannot give. There is nothing calculating about him.
He never thinks evil, he only does it. From a psychological point of view he is
one of the most interesting characters of modern fiction, as from an artistic he
is one of the most attractive. As we grow to know him he stirs strange
questions for us, and makes us feel that it is not the wicked only who do
wrong, nor the bad alone who work evil.
And by what a subtle objective method does Dostoieffski show us his
characters! He never tickets them with a list nor labels them with a
description. We grow to know them very gradually, as we know people whom
we meet in society, at first by little tricks of manner, personal appearance,
fancies in dress, and the like; and afterwards by their deeds and words; and
even then they constantly elude us, for though Dostoieffski may lay bare for us
the secrets of their nature, yet he never explains his personages away; they are
always surprising us by something that they say or do, and keep to the end the
eternal mystery of life.
Irrespective of its value as a work of art, this novel possesses a deep
autobiographical interest also, as the character of Vania, the poor student who
loves Natasha through all her sin and shame, is Dostoieffski’s study of
himself. Goethe once had to delay the completion of one of his novels till
experience had furnished him with new situations, but almost before he had
arrived at manhood Dostoieffski knew life in its most real forms; poverty and
suffering, pain and misery, prison, exile, and love, were soon familiar to him,
and by the lips of Vania he has told his own story. This note of personal
feeling, this harsh reality of actual experience, undoubtedly gives the book
something of its strange fervour and terrible passion, yet it has not made it
egotistic; we see things from every point of view, and we feel, not that fiction
has been trammelled by fact, but that fact itself has become ideal and
imaginative. Pitiless, too, though Dostoieffski is in his method as an artist, as a
man he is full of human pity for all, for those who do evil as well as for those
who suffer it, for the selfish no less than for those whose lives are wrecked for
others and whose sacrifice is in vain. Since Adam Bede and Le Père Goriot no
more powerful novel has been written than Insult and Injury.
MR. PATER’S IMAGINARY PORTRAITS
(Pall Mall Gazette, June 11, 1887.)
To convey ideas through the medium of images has always been the aim of
those who are artists as well as thinkers in literature, and it is to a desire to
give a sensuous environment to intellectual concepts that we owe Mr. Pater’s
last volume. For these Imaginary or, as we should prefer to call them,
Imaginative Portraits of his, form a series of philosophic studies in which the
philosophy is tempered by personality, and the thought shown under varying
conditions of mood and manner, the very permanence of each principle
gaining something through the change and colour of the life through which it
finds expression. The most fascinating of all these pictures is undoubtedly that
of Sebastian Van Storck. The account of Watteau is perhaps a little too
fanciful, and the description of him as one who was ‘always a seeker after
something in the world, that is there in no satisfying measure, or not at all,’
seems to us more applicable to him who saw Mona Lisa sitting among the
rocks than the gay and debonair peintre des fêtes galantes. But Sebastian, the
grave young Dutch philosopher, is charmingly drawn. From the first glimpse
we get of him, skating over the water-meadows with his plume of squirrel’s
tail and his fur muff, in all the modest pleasantness of boyhood, down to his
strange death in the desolate house amid the sands of the Helder, we seem to
see him, to know him, almost to hear the low music of his voice. He is a
dreamer, as the common phrase goes, and yet he is poetical in this sense, that
his theorems shape life for him, directly. Early in youth he is stirred by a fine
saying of Spinoza, and sets himself to realize the ideal of an intellectual
disinterestedness, separating himself more and more from the transient world
of sensation, accident and even affection, till what is finite and relative
becomes of no interest to him, and he feels that as nature is but a thought of
his, so he himself is but a passing thought of God. This conception, of the
power of a mere metaphysical abstraction over the mind of one so fortunately
endowed for the reception of the sensible world, is exceedingly delightful, and
Mr. Pater has never written a more subtle psychological study, the fact that
Sebastian dies in an attempt to save the life of a little child giving to the whole
story a touch of poignant pathos and sad irony.
Denys l’Auxerrois is suggested by a figure found, or said to be found, on
some old tapestries in Auxerre, the figure of a ‘flaxen and flowery creature,
sometimes well-nigh naked among the vine-leaves, sometimes muffled in
skins against the cold, sometimes in the dress of a monk, but always with a
strong impress of real character and incident from the veritable streets’ of the
town itself. From this strange design Mr. Pater has fashioned a curious
mediæval myth of the return of Dionysus among men, a myth steeped in
colour and passion and old romance, full of wonder and full of worship, Denys
himself being half animal and half god, making the world mad with a new
ecstasy of living, stirring the artists simply by his visible presence, drawing the
marvel of music from reed and pipe, and slain at last in a stage-play by those
who had loved him. In its rich affluence of imagery this story is like a picture
by Mantegna, and indeed Mantegna might have suggested the description of
the pageant in which Denys rides upon a gaily-painted chariot, in soft silken
raiment and, for head-dress, a strange elephant scalp with gilded tusks.
If Denys l’Auxerrois symbolizes the passion of the senses and Sebastian
Van Storck the philosophic passion, as they certainly seem to do, though no
mere formula or definition can adequately express the freedom and variety of
the life that they portray, the passion for the imaginative world of art is the
basis of the story of Duke Carl of Rosenmold. Duke Carl is not unlike the late
King of Bavaria, in his love of France, his admiration for the Grand Monarque
and his fantastic desire to amaze and to bewilder, but the resemblance is
possibly only a chance one. In fact Mr. Pater’s young hero is the precursor of
the Aufklärung of the last century, the German precursor of Herder and
Lessing and Goethe himself, and finds the forms of art ready to his hand
without any national spirit to fill them or make them vital and responsive. He
too dies, trampled to death by the soldiers of the country he so much admired,
on the night of his marriage with a peasant girl, the very failure of his life
lending him a certain melancholy grace and dramatic interest.
On the whole, then, this is a singularly attractive book. Mr. Pater is an
intellectual impressionist. He does not weary us with any definite doctrine or
seek to suit life to any formal creed. He is always looking for exquisite
moments and, when he has found them, he analyses them with delicate and
delightful art and then passes on, often to the opposite pole of thought or
feeling, knowing that every mood has its own quality and charm and is
justified by its mere existence. He has taken the sensationalism of Greek
philosophy and made it a new method of art criticism. As for his style, it is
curiously ascetic. Now and then, we come across phrases with a strange
sensuousness of expression, as when he tells us how Denys l’Auxerrois, on his
return from a long journey, ‘ate flesh for the first time, tearing the hot, red
morsels with his delicate fingers in a kind of wild greed,’ but such passages
are rare. Asceticism is the keynote of Mr. Pater’s prose; at times it is almost
too severe in its self-control and makes us long for a little more freedom. For
indeed, the danger of such prose as his is that it is apt to become somewhat
laborious. Here and there, one is tempted to say of Mr. Pater that he is ‘a
seeker after something in language, that is there in no satisfying measure, or
not at all.’ The continual preoccupation with phrase and epithet has its
drawbacks as well as its virtues. And yet, when all is said, what wonderful
prose it is, with its subtle preferences, its fastidious purity, its rejection of what
is common or ordinary! Mr. Pater has the true spirit of selection, the true art of
omission. If he be not among the greatest prose writers of our literature he is,
at least, our greatest artist in prose; and though it may be admitted that the best
style is that which seems an unconscious result rather than a conscious aim,
still in these latter days when violent rhetoric does duty for eloquence and
vulgarity usurps the name of nature, we should be grateful for a style that
deliberately aims at perfection of form, that seeks to produce its effect by
artistic means and sets before itself an ideal of grave and chastened beauty.
A GERMAN PRINCESS
(Woman’s World, November 1887.)
The Princess Christian’s translation of the Memoirs of Wilhelmine,
Margravine of Baireuth, is a most fascinating and delightful book. The
Margravine and her brother, Frederick the Great, were, as the Princess herself
points out in an admirably written introduction, ‘among the first of those
questioning minds that strove after spiritual freedom’ in the last century. ‘They
had studied,’says the Princess, ‘the English philosophers, Newton, Locke, and
Shaftesbury, and were roused to enthusiasm by the writings of Voltaire and
Rousseau. Their whole lives bore the impress of the influence of French
thought on the burning questions of the day. In the eighteenth century began
that great struggle of philosophy against tyranny and worn-out abuses which
culminated in the French Revolution. The noblest minds were engaged in the
struggle, and, like most reformers, they pushed their conclusions to extremes,
and too often lost sight of the need of a due proportion in things. The
Margravine’s influence on the intellectual development of her country is
untold. She formed at Baireuth a centre of culture and learning which had
before been undreamt of in Germany.’
The historical value of these Memoirs is, of course, well known. Carlyle
speaks of them as being ‘by far the best authority’ on the early life of
Frederick the Great. But considered merely as the autobiography of a clever
and charming woman, they are no less interesting, and even those who care
nothing for eighteenth-century politics, and look upon history itself as an
unattractive form of fiction, cannot fail to be fascinated by the Margravine’s
wit, vivacity and humour, by her keen powers of observation, and by her
brilliant and assertive egotism. Not that her life was by any means a happy
one. Her father, to quote the Princess Christian, ‘ruled his family with the
same harsh despotism with which he ruled his country, taking pleasure in
making his power felt by all in the most galling manner,’ and the Margravine
and her brother ‘had much to suffer, not only from his ungovernable temper,
but also from the real privations to which they were subjected.’ Indeed, the
picture the Margravine gives of the King is quite extraordinary. ‘He despised
all learning,’ she writes, ‘and wished me to occupy myself with nothing but
needlework and household duties or details. Had he found me writing or
reading, he would probably have whipped me.’ He ‘considered music a capital
offence, and maintained that every one should devote himself to one object:
men to the military service, and women to their household duties. Science and
the arts he counted among the “seven deadly sins.”’ Sometimes he took to
religion, ‘and then,’ says the Margravine, ‘we lived like trappists, to the great
grief of my brother and myself. Every afternoon the King preached a sermon,
to which we had to listen as attentively as if it proceeded from an Apostle. My
brother and I were often seized with such an intense sense of the ridiculous
that we burst out laughing, upon which an apostolic curse was poured out on
our heads, which we had to accept with a show of humility and penitence.’
Economy and soldiers were his only topics of conversation; his chief social
amusement was to make his guests intoxicated; and as for his temper, the
accounts the Margravine gives of it would be almost incredible if they were
not amply corroborated from other sources. Suetonius has written of the
strange madness that comes on kings, but even in his melodramatic chronicles
there is hardly anything that rivals what the Margravine has to tell us. Here is
one of her pictures of family life at a Royal Court in the last century, and it is
not by any means the worst scene she describes:
On one occasion, when his temper was more than usually bad, he told the
Queen that he had received letters from Anspach, in which the Margrave
announced his arrival at Berlin for the beginning of May. He was coming there
for the purpose of marrying my sister, and one of his ministers would arrive
previously with the betrothal ring. My father asked my sister whether she were
pleased at this prospect, and how she would arrange her household. Now my
sister had always made a point of telling him whatever came into her head,
even the greatest home-truths, and he had never taken her outspokenness
amiss. On this occasion, therefore, relying on former experience, she answered
him as follows: ‘When I have a house of my own, I shall take care to have a
well-appointed dinner-table, better than yours is, and if I have children of my
own, I shall not plague them as you do yours, and force them to eat things they
thoroughly dislike!’
‘What is amiss with my dinner-table?’ the King enquired, getting very red
in the face.
‘You ask what is the matter with it,’ my sister replied; ‘there is not enough
on it for us to eat, and what there is is cabbage and carrots, which we detest.’
Her first answer had already angered my father, but now he gave vent to his
fury. But instead of punishing my sister he poured it all on my mother, my
brother, and myself. To begin with he threw his plate at my brother’s head,
who would have been struck had he not got out of the way; a second one he
threw at me, which I also happily escaped; then torrents of abuse followed
these first signs of hostility. He reproached the Queen with having brought up
her children so badly. ‘You will curse your mother,’ he said to my brother, ‘for
having made you such a good-for-nothing creature.’ . . . As my brother and I
passed near him to leave the room, he hit out at us with his crutch. Happily we
escaped the blow, for it would certainly have struck us down, and we at last
escaped without harm.
Yet, as the Princess Christian remarks, ‘despite the almost cruel treatment
Wilhelmine received from her father, it is noticeable that throughout her
memoirs she speaks of him with the greatest affection. She makes constant
reference to his “good heart”’; and says that his faults ‘were more those of
temper than of nature.’ Nor could all the misery and wretchedness of her home
life dull the brightness of her intellect. What would have made others morbid,
made her satirical. Instead of weeping over her own personal tragedies, she
laughs at the general comedy of life. Here, for instance, is her description of
Peter the Great and his wife, who arrived at Berlin in 1718:
The Czarina was small, broad, and brown-looking, without the slightest
dignity or appearance. You had only to look at her to detect her low origin.
She might have passed for a German actress, she had decked herself out in
such a manner. Her dress had been bought second-hand, and was trimmed with
some dirty looking silver embroidery; the bodice was trimmed with precious
stones, arranged in such a manner as to represent the double eagle. She wore a
dozen orders; and round the bottom of her dress hung quantities of relics and
pictures of saints, which rattled when she walked, and reminded one of a
smartly harnessed mule. The orders too made a great noise, knocking against
each other.
The Czar, on the other hand, was tall and well grown, with a handsome
face, but his expression was coarse, and impressed one with fear. He wore a
simple sailor’s dress. His wife, who spoke German very badly, called her court
jester to her aid, and spoke Russian with her. This poor creature was a Princess
Gallizin, who had been obliged to undertake this sorry office to save her life,
as she had been mixed up in a conspiracy against the Czar, and had twice been
flogged with the knout!
****
The following day [the Czar] visited all the sights of Berlin, amongst
others the very curious collection of coins and antiques. Amongst these last
named was a statue, representing a heathen god. It was anything but attractive,
but was the most valuable in the collection. The Czar admired it very much,
and insisted on the Czarina kissing it. On her refusing, he said to her in bad
German that she should lose her head if she did not at once obey him. Being
terrified at the Czar’s anger she immediately complied with his orders without
the least hesitation. The Czar asked the King to give him this and other statues,
a request which he could not refuse. The same thing happened about a
cupboard, inlaid with amber. It was the only one of its kind, and had cost King
Frederick I. an enormous sum, and the consternation was general on its having
to be sent to Petersburg.
This barbarous Court happily left after two days. The Queen rushed at once
to Monbijou, which she found in a state resembling that of the fall of
Jerusalem. I never saw such a sight. Everything was destroyed, so that the
Queen was obliged to rebuild the whole house.
Nor are the Margravine’s descriptions of her reception as a bride in the
principality of Baireuth less amusing. Hof was the first town she came to, and
a deputation of nobles was waiting there to welcome her. This is her account
of them:
Their faces would have frightened little children, and, to add to their
beauty, they had arranged their hair to resemble the wigs that were then in
fashion. Their dresses clearly denoted the antiquity of their families, as they
were composed of heirlooms, and were cut accordingly, so that most of them
did not fit. In spite of their costumes being the ‘Court Dresses,’ the gold and
silver trimmings were so black that you had a difficulty in making out of what
they were made. The manners of these nobles suited their faces and their
clothes. They might have passed for peasants. I could scarcely restrain my
laughter when I first beheld these strange figures. I spoke to each in turn, but
none of them understood what I said, and their replies sounded to me like
Hebrew, because the dialect of the Empire is quite different from that spoken
in Brandenburg.
The clergy also presented themselves. These were totally different
creatures. Round their necks they wore great ruffs, which resembled washing
baskets. They spoke very slowly, so that I might be able to understand them
better. They said the most foolish things, and it was only with much difficulty
that I was able to prevent myself from laughing. At last I got rid of all these
people, and we sat down to dinner. I tried my best to converse with those at
table, but it was useless. At last I touched on agricultural topics, and then they
began to thaw. I was at once informed of all their different farmsteads and
herds of cattle. An almost interesting discussion took place as to whether the
oxen in the upper part of the country were fatter than those in the lowlands.
****
I was told that as the next day was Sunday, I must spend it at Hof, and
listen to a sermon. Never before had I heard such a sermon! The clergyman
began by giving us an account of all the marriages that had taken place from
Adam’s time to that of Noah. We were spared no detail, so that the gentlemen
all laughed and the poor ladies blushed. The dinner went off as on the previous
day. In the afternoon all the ladies came to pay me their respects. Gracious
heavens! What ladies, too! They were all as ugly as the gentlemen, and their
head-dresses were so curious that swallows might have built their nests in
them.
As for Baireuth itself, and its petty Court, the picture she gives of it is
exceedingly curious. Her father-in-law, the reigning Margrave, was a narrowminded mediocrity, whose conversation ‘resembled that of a sermon read
aloud for the purpose of sending the listener to sleep,’ and he had only two
topics, Telemachus, and Amelot de la Houssaye’s Roman History. The
Ministers, from Baron von Stein, who always said ‘yes’ to everything, to
Baron von Voit, who always said ‘no,’ were not by any means an intellectual
set of men. ‘Their chief amusement,’ says the Margravine, ‘was drinking from
morning till night,’ and horses and cattle were all they talked about. The palace
itself was shabby, decayed and dirty. ‘I was like a lamb among wolves,’ cries
the poor Margravine; ‘I was settled in a strange country, at a Court which more
resembled a peasant’s farm, surrounded by coarse, bad, dangerous, and
tiresome people.’
Yet her esprit never deserted her. She is always clever, witty, and
entertaining. Her stories about the endless squabbles over precedence are
extremely amusing. The society of her day cared very little for good manners,
knew, indeed, very little about them, but all questions of etiquette were of vital
importance, and the Margravine herself, though she saw the shallowness of the
whole system, was far too proud not to assert her rights when circumstances
demanded it, as the description she gives of her visit to the Empress of
Germany shows very clearly. When this meeting was first proposed, the
Margravine declined positively to entertain the idea. ‘There was no precedent,’
she writes, ‘of a King’s daughter and the Empress having met, and I did not
know to what rights I ought to lay claim.’ Finally, however, she is induced to
consent, but she lays down three conditions for her reception:
I desired first of all that the Empress’s Court should receive me at the foot
of the stairs, secondly, that she should meet me at the door of her bedroom,
and, thirdly, that she should offer me an armchair to sit on.
****
They disputed all day over the conditions I had made. The two first were
granted me, but all that could be obtained with respect to the third was, that
the Empress would use quite a small armchair, whilst she gave me a chair.
Next day I saw this Royal personage. I own that had I been in her place I
would have made all the rules of etiquette and ceremony the excuse for not
being obliged to appear. The Empress was small and stout, round as a ball,
very ugly, and without dignity or manner. Her mind corresponded to her body.
She was terribly bigoted, and spent her whole day praying. The old and ugly
are generally the Almighty’s portion. She received me trembling all over, and
was so upset that she could not say a word.
After some silence I began the conversation in French. She answered me in
her Austrian dialect that she could not speak in that language, and begged I
would speak in German. The conversation did not last long, for the Austrian
and low Saxon tongues are so different from each other that to those
acquainted with only one the other is unintelligible. This is what happened to
us. A third person would have laughed at our misunderstandings, for we
caught only a word here and there, and had to guess the rest. The poor
Empress was such a slave to etiquette that she would have thought it high
treason had she spoken to me in a foreign language, though she understood
French quite well.
Many other extracts might be given from this delightful book, but from the
few that have been selected some idea can be formed of the vivacity and
picturesqueness of the Margravine’s style. As for her character, it is very well
summed up by the Princess Christian, who, while admitting that she often
appears almost heartless and inconsiderate, yet claims that, ‘taken as a whole,
she stands out in marked prominence among the most gifted women of the
eighteenth century, not only by her mental powers, but by her goodness of
heart, her self-sacrificing devotion, and true friendship.’ An interesting sequel
to her Memoirs would be her correspondence with Voltaire, and it is to be
hoped that we may shortly see a translation of these letters from the same
accomplished pen to which we owe the present volume.
A VILLAGE TRAGEDY
One of the most powerful and pathetic novels that has recently appeared is
A Village Tragedy by Margaret L. Woods. To find any parallel to this lurid
little story, one must go to Dostoieffski or to Guy de Maupassant. Not that
Mrs. Woods can be said to have taken either of these two great masters of
fiction as her model, but there is something in her work that recalls their
method; she has not a little of their fierce intensity, their terrible concentration,
their passionless yet poignant objectivity; like them, she seems to allow life to
suggest its own mode of presentation; and, like them, she recognizes that a
frank acceptance of the facts of life is the true basis of all modern imitative art.
The scene of Mrs. Woods’s story lies in one of the villages near Oxford; the
characters are very few in number, and the plot is extremely simple. It is a
romance of modern Arcadia—a tale of the love of a farm-labourer for a girl
who, though slightly above him in social station and education, is yet herself
also a servant on a farm. True Arcadians they are, both of them, and their
ignorance and isolation serve only to intensify the tragedy that gives the story
its title. It is the fashion nowadays to label literature, so, no doubt, Mrs.
Woods’s novel will be spoken of as ‘realistic.’ Its realism, however, is the
realism of the artist, not of the reporter; its tact of treatment, subtlety of
perception, and fine distinction of style, make it rather a poem than a procèsverbal; and though it lays bare to us the mere misery of life, it suggests
something of life’s mystery also. Very delicate, too, is the handling of external
Nature. There are no formal guide-book descriptions of scenery, nor anything
of what Byron petulantly called ‘twaddling about trees,’ but we seem to
breathe the atmosphere of the country, to catch the exquisite scent of the
beanfields, so familiar to all who have ever wandered through the Oxfordshire
lanes in June; to hear the birds singing in the thicket, and the sheep-bells
tinkling from the hill.
Characterization, that enemy of literary form, is such an essential part of
the method of the modern writer of fiction, that Nature has almost become to
the novelist what light and shade are to the painter—the one permanent
element of style; and if the power of A Village Tragedy be due to its portrayal
of human life, no small portion of its charm comes from its Theocritean
setting.
MR. MORRIS’S COMPLETION OF THE ODYSSEY
(Pall Mall Gazette, November 24, 1887.)
Mr. Morris’s second volume brings the great romantic epic of Greek
literature to its perfect conclusion, and although there can never be an ultimate
translation of either Iliad or Odyssey, as each successive age is sure to find
pleasure in rendering the two poems in its own manner and according to its
own canons of taste, still it is not too much to say that Mr. Morris’s version
will always be a true classic amongst our classical translations. It is not, of
course, flawless. In our notice of the first volume we ventured to say that Mr.
Morris was sometimes far more Norse than Greek, nor does the volume that
now lies before us make us alter that opinion. The particular metre, also,
selected by Mr. Morris, although admirably adapted to express ‘the strongwinged music of Homer,’ as far as its flow and freedom are concerned, misses
something of its dignity and calm. Here, it must be admitted, we feel a distinct
loss, for there is in Homer not a little of Milton’s lofty manner, and if swiftness
be an essential of the Greek hexameter, stateliness is one of its distinguishing
qualities in Homer’s hands. This defect, however, if we must call it a defect,
seems almost unavoidable, as for certain metrical reasons a majestic
movement in English verse is necessarily a slow movement; and, after all that
can be said is said, how really admirable is this whole translation! If we set
aside its noble qualities as a poem and look on it purely from the scholar’s
point of view, how straightforward it is, how honest and direct! Its fidelity to
the original is far beyond that of any other verse-translation in our literature,
and yet it is not the fidelity of a pedant to his text but rather the fine loyalty of
poet to poet.
When Mr. Morris’s first volume appeared many of the critics complained
that his occasional use of archaic words and unusual expressions robbed his
version of the true Homeric simplicity. This, however, is not a very felicitous
criticism, for while Homer is undoubtedly simple in his clearness and
largeness of vision, his wonderful power of direct narration, his wholesome
sanity, and the purity and precision of his method, simple in language he
undoubtedly is not. What he was to his contemporaries we have, of course, no
means of judging, but we know that the Athenian of the fifth century b.c.
found him in many places difficult to understand, and when the creative age
was succeeded by the age of criticism and Alexandria began to take the place
of Athens as the centre of culture for the Hellenistic world, Homeric
dictionaries and glossaries seem to have been constantly published. Indeed,
Athenæus tells us of a wonderful Byzantine blue-stocking, a précieuse from
the Propontis, who wrote a long hexameter poem, called Mnemosyne, full of
ingenious commentaries on difficulties in Homer, and in fact, it is evident that,
as far as the language is concerned, such a phrase as ‘Homeric simplicity’
would have rather amazed an ancient Greek. As for Mr. Morris’s tendency to
emphasize the etymological meaning of words, a point commented on with
somewhat flippant severity in a recent number of Macmillan’s Magazine, here
Mr. Morris seems to us to be in complete accord, not merely with the spirit of
Homer, but with the spirit of all early poetry. It is quite true that language is
apt to degenerate into a system of almost algebraic symbols, and the modern
city-man who takes a ticket for Blackfriars Bridge, naturally never thinks of
the Dominican monks who once had their monastery by Thames-side, and
after whom the spot is named. But in earlier times it was not so. Men were
then keenly conscious of the real meaning of words, and early poetry,
especially, is full of this feeling, and, indeed, may be said to owe to it no small
portion of its poetic power and charm. These old words, then, and this old use
of words which we find in Mr. Morris’s Odyssey can be amply justified upon
historical grounds, and as for their artistic effect, it is quite excellent. Pope
tried to put Homer into the ordinary language of his day, with what result we
know only too well; but Mr. Morris, who uses his archaisms with the tact of a
true artist, and to whom indeed they seem to come absolutely naturally, has
succeeded in giving to his version by their aid that touch, not of ‘quaintness,’
for Homer is never quaint, but of old-world romance and old-world beauty,
which we moderns find so pleasurable, and to which the Greeks themselves
were so keenly sensitive.
As for individual passages of special merit, Mr. Morris’s translation is no
robe of rags sewn with purple patches for critics to sample. Its real value lies
in the absolute rightness and coherence of the whole, in the grand architecture
of the swift, strong verse, and in the fact that the standard is not merely high
but everywhere sustained. It is impossible, however, to resist the temptation of
quoting Mr. Morris’s rendering of that famous passage in the twenty-third
book of the epic, in which Odysseus eludes the trap laid for him by Penelope,
whose very faith in the certainty of her husband’s return makes her sceptical of
his identity when he stands before her; an instance, by the way, of Homer’s
wonderful psychological knowledge of human nature, as it is always the
dreamer himself who is most surprised when his dream comes true.
Thus she spake to prove her husband; but Odysseus, grieved at heart,
Spake thus unto his bed-mate well-skilled in gainful art:
‘O woman, thou sayest a word exceeding grievous to me!
Who hath otherwhere shifted my bedstead? full hard for him should it be,
For as deft as he were, unless soothly a very God come here,
Who easily, if he willed it, might shift it otherwhere.
But no mortal man is living, how strong soe’er in his youth,
Who shall lightly hale it elsewhere, since a mighty wonder forsooth
Is wrought in that fashioned bedstead, and I wrought it, and I alone.
In the close grew a thicket of olive, a long-leaved tree full-grown,
That flourished and grew goodly as big as a pillar about,
So round it I built my bride-room, till I did the work right out
With ashlar stone close-fitting; and I roofed it overhead,
And thereto joined doors I made me, well-fitting in their stead.
Then I lopped away the boughs of the long-leafed olive-tree,
And, shearing the bole from the root up full well and cunningly,
I planed it about with the brass, and set the rule thereto,
And shaping thereof a bed-post, with the wimble I bored it through.
So beginning, I wrought out the bedstead, and finished it utterly,
And with gold enwrought it about, and with silver and ivory,
And stretched on it a thong of oxhide with the purple dye made bright.
Thus then the sign I have shown thee; nor, woman, know I aright
If my bed yet bideth steadfast, or if to another place
Some man hath moved it, and smitten the olive-bole from its base.’
These last twelve books of the Odyssey have not the same marvel of
romance, adventure and colour that we find in the earlier part of the epic.
There is nothing in them that we can compare to the exquisite idyll of
Nausicaa or to the Titanic humour of the episode in the Cyclops’ cave.
Penelope has not the glamour of Circe, and the song of the Sirens may sound
sweeter than the whizz of the arrows of Odysseus as he stands on the threshold
of his hall. Yet, for sheer intensity of passionate power, for concentration of
intellectual interest and for masterly dramatic construction, these latter books
are quite unequalled. Indeed, they show very clearly how it was that, as Greek
art developed, the epos passed into the drama. The whole scheme of the
argument, the return of the hero in disguise, his disclosure of himself to his
son, his terrible vengeance on his enemies and his final recognition by his
wife, reminds us of the plot of more than one Greek play, and shows us what
the great Athenian poet meant when he said that his own dramas were merely
scraps from Homer’s table. In rendering this splendid poem into English verse,
Mr. Morris has done our literature a service that can hardly be over-estimated,
and it is pleasant to think that, even should the classics be entirely excluded
from our educational systems, the English boy will still be able to know
something of Homer’s delightful tales, to catch an echo of his grand music and
to wander with the wise Odysseus round ‘the shores of old romance.’
MRS. SOMERVILLE
(Pall Mall Gazette, November 30, 1887.)
Phyllis Browne’s Life of Mrs. Somerville forms part of a very interesting
little series, called ‘The World’s Workers’—a collection of short biographies
catholic enough to include personalities so widely different as Turner and
Richard Cobden, Handel and Sir Titus Salt, Robert Stephenson and Florence
Nightingale, and yet possessing a certain definite aim. As a mathematician and
a scientist, the translator and popularizer of La Mécanique Céleste, and the
author of an important book on physical geography, Mrs. Somerville is, of
course, well known. The scientific bodies of Europe covered her with honours;
her bust stands in the hall of the Royal Society, and one of the Women’s
Colleges at Oxford bears her name. Yet, considered simply in the light of a
wife and a mother, she is no less admirable; and those who consider that
stupidity is the proper basis for the domestic virtues, and that intellectual
women must of necessity be helpless with their hands, cannot do better than
read Phyllis Browne’s pleasant little book, in which they will find that the
greatest woman-mathematician of any age was a clever needlewoman, a good
housekeeper, and a most skilful cook. Indeed, Mrs. Somerville seems to have
been quite renowned for her cookery. The discoverers of the North-West
Passage christened an island ‘Somerville,’ not as a tribute to the distinguished
mathematician, but as a recognition of the excellence of some orange
marmalade which the distinguished mathematician had prepared with her own
hands and presented to the ships before they left England; and to the fact that
she was able to make currant jelly at a very critical moment she owed the
affection of some of her husband’s relatives, who up to that time had been
rather prejudiced against her on the ground that she was merely an unpractical
Blue-stocking.
Nor did her scientific knowledge ever warp or dull the tenderness and
humanity of her nature. For birds and animals she had always a great love. We
hear of her as a little girl watching with eager eyes the swallows as they built
their nests in summer or prepared for their flight in the autumn; and when
snow was on the ground she used to open the windows to let the robins hop in
and pick crumbs on the breakfast-table. On one occasion she went with her
father on a tour in the Highlands, and found on her return that a pet goldfinch,
which had been left in the charge of the servants, had been neglected by them
and had died of starvation. She was almost heart-broken at the event, and in
writing her Recollections, seventy years after, she mentioned it and said that,
as she wrote, she felt deep pain. Her chief pet in her old age was a mountain
sparrow, which used to perch on her arm and go to sleep there while she was
writing. One day the sparrow fell into the water-jug and was drowned, to the
great grief of its mistress who could hardly be consoled for its loss, though
later on we hear of a beautiful paroquet taking the place of le moineau
d’Uranie, and becoming Mrs. Somerville’s constant companion. She was also
very energetic, Phyllis Browne tells us, in trying to get a law passed in the
Italian Parliament for the protection of animals, and said once, with reference
to this subject, ‘We English cannot boast of humanity so long as our sportsmen
find pleasure in shooting down tame pigeons as they fly terrified out of a
cage’—a remark with which I entirely agree. Mr. Herbert’s Bill for the
protection of land birds gave her immense pleasure, though, to quote her own
words, she was ‘grieved to find that “the lark, which at heaven’s gate sings,” is
thought unworthy of man’s protection’; and she took a great fancy to a
gentleman who, on being told of the number of singing birds that is eaten in
Italy—nightingales, goldfinches, and robins—exclaimed in horror, ‘What!
robins! our household birds! I would as soon eat a child!’ Indeed, she believed
to some extent in the immortality of animals on the ground that, if animals
have no future, it would seem as if some were created for uncompensated
misery—an idea which does not seem to me to be either extravagant or
fantastic, though it must be admitted that the optimism on which it is based
receives absolutely no support from science.
On the whole, Phyllis Browne’s book is very pleasant reading. Its only
fault is that it is far too short, and this is a fault so rare in modern literature that
it almost amounts to a distinction. However, Phyllis Browne has managed to
crowd into the narrow limits at her disposal a great many interesting
anecdotes. The picture she gives of Mrs. Somerville working away at her
translation of Laplace in the same room with her children is very charming,
and reminds one of what is told of George Sand; there is an amusing account
of Mrs. Somerville’s visit to the widow of the young Pretender, the Countess
of Albany, who, after talking with her for some time, exclaimed, ‘So you don’t
speak Italian. You must have had a very bad education’! And this story about
the Waverley Novels may possibly be new to some of my readers:
A very amusing circumstance in connection with Mrs. Somerville’s
acquaintance with Sir Walter arose out of the childish inquisitiveness of
Woronzow Greig, Mrs. Somerville’s little boy.
During the time Mrs. Somerville was visiting Abbotsford the Waverley
Novels were appearing, and were creating a great sensation; yet even Scott’s
intimate friends did not know that he was the author; he enjoyed keeping the
affair a mystery. But little Woronzow discovered what he was about. One day
when Mrs. Somerville was talking about a novel that had just been published,
Woronzow said, ‘I knew all these stories long ago, for Mr. Scott writes on the
dinner-table; when he has finished he puts the green cloth with the papers in a
corner of the dining-room, and when he goes out Charlie Scott and I read the
stories.’
Phyllis Browne remarks that this incident shows ‘that persons who want to
keep a secret ought to be very careful when children are about’; but the story
seems to me to be far too charming to require any moral of the kind.
Bound up in the same volume is a Life of Miss Mary Carpenter, also
written by Phyllis Browne. Miss Carpenter does not seem to me to have the
charm and fascination of Mrs. Somerville. There is always something about
her that is formal, limited, and precise. When she was about two years old she
insisted on being called ‘Doctor Carpenter’ in the nursery; at the age of twelve
she is described by a friend as a sedate little girl, who always spoke like a
book; and before she entered on her educational schemes she wrote down a
solemn dedication of herself to the service of humanity. However, she was one
of the practical, hardworking saints of the nineteenth century, and it is no
doubt quite right that the saints should take themselves very seriously. It is
only fair also to remember that her work of rescue and reformation was carried
on under great difficulties. Here, for instance, is the picture Miss Cobbe gives
us of one of the Bristol night-schools:
It was a wonderful spectacle to see Mary Carpenter sitting patiently before
the large school gallery in St. James’s Back, teaching, singing, and praying
with the wild street-boys, in spite of endless interruptions caused by such
proceedings as shooting marbles at any object behind her, whistling, stamping,
fighting, shrieking out ‘Amen’ in the middle of a prayer, and sometimes rising
en masse and tearing like a troop of bisons in hob-nailed shoes down from the
gallery, round the great schoolroom, and down the stairs, and into the street.
These irrepressible outbreaks she bore with infinite good humour.
Her own account is somewhat pleasanter, and shows that ‘the troop of
bisons in hob-nailed shoes’ was not always so barbarous.
I had taken to my class on the preceding week some specimens of ferns
neatly gummed on white paper. . . . This time I took a piece of coal-shale, with
impressions of ferns, to show them. . . . I told each to examine the specimen,
and tell me what he thought it was. W. gave so bright a smile that I saw he
knew; none of the others could tell; he said they were ferns, like what I
showed them last week, but he thought they were chiselled on the stone. Their
surprise and pleasure were great when I explained the matter to them.
The history of Joseph: they all found a difficulty in realizing that this had
actually occurred. One asked if Egypt existed now, and if people lived in it.
When I told them that buildings now stood which had been erected about the
time of Joseph, one said that it was impossible, as they must have fallen down
ere this. I showed them the form of a pyramid, and they were satisfied. One
asked if all books were true.
The story of Macbeth impressed them very much. They knew the name of
Shakespeare, having seen his name over a public-house.
A boy defined conscience as ‘a thing a gentleman hasn’t got, who, when a
boy finds his purse and gives it back to him, doesn’t give the boy sixpence.’
Another boy was asked, after a Sunday evening lecture on ‘Thankfulness,’
what pleasure he enjoyed most in the course of a year. He replied candidly,
‘Cock-fightin’, ma’am; there’s a pit up by the “Black Boy” as is worth
anythink in Brissel.’
There is something a little pathetic in the attempt to civilize the rough
street-boy by means of the refining influence of ferns and fossils, and it is
difficult to help feeling that Miss Carpenter rather over-estimated the value of
elementary education. The poor are not to be fed upon facts. Even
Shakespeare and the Pyramids are not sufficient; nor is there much use in
giving them the results of culture, unless we also give them those conditions
under which culture can be realized. In these cold, crowded cities of the North,
the proper basis for morals, using the word in its wide Hellenic signification,
is to be found in architecture, not in books.
Still, it would be ungenerous not to recognize that Mary Carpenter gave to
the children of the poor not merely her learning, but her love. In early life, her
biographer tells us, she had longed for the happiness of being a wife and a
mother; but later she became content that her affection could be freely given to
all who needed it, and the verse in the prophecies, ‘I have given thee children
whom thou hast not borne,’ seemed to her to indicate what was to be her true
mission. Indeed, she rather inclined to Bacon’s opinion, that unmarried people
do the best public work. ‘It is quite striking,’ she says in one of her letters, ‘to
observe how much the useful power and influence of woman has developed of
late years. Unattached ladies, such as widows and unmarried women, have
quite ample work to do in the world for the good of others to absorb all their
powers. Wives and mothers have a very noble work given them by God, and
want no more.’ The whole passage is extremely interesting, and the phrase
‘unattached ladies’ is quite delightful, and reminds one of Charles Lamb.