M. CARO ON GEORGE SAND
(Pall Mall Gazette, April 14, 1888.)
The biography of a very great man from the pen of a very ladylike writer—
this is the best description we can give of M. Caro’s Life of George Sand. The
late Professor of the Sorbonne could chatter charmingly about culture, and had
all the fascinating insincerity of an accomplished phrase-maker; being an
extremely superior person he had a great contempt for Democracy and its
doings, but he was always popular with the Duchesses of the Faubourg, as
there was nothing in history or in literature that he could not explain away for
their edification; having never done anything remarkable he was naturally
elected a member of the Academy, and he always remained loyal to the
traditions of that thoroughly respectable and thoroughly pretentious institution.
In fact, he was just the sort of man who should never have attempted to write a
Life of George Sand or to interpret George Sand’s genius. He was too
feminine to appreciate the grandeur of that large womanly nature, too much of
a dilettante to realize the masculine force of that strong and ardent mind. He
never gets at the secret of George Sand, and never brings us near to her
wonderful personality. He looks on her simply as a littérateur, as a writer of
pretty stories of country life and of charming, if somewhat exaggerated,
romances. But George Sand was much more than this. Beautiful as are such
books as Consuelo and Mauprat, François le Champi and La Mare au Diable,
yet in none of them is she adequately expressed, by none of them is she
adequately revealed. As Mr. Matthew Arnold said, many years ago, ‘We do
not know George Sand unless we feel the spirit which goes through her work
as a whole.’ With this spirit, however, M. Caro has no sympathy. Madame
Sand’s doctrines are antediluvian, he tells us, her philosophy is quite dead and
her ideas of social regeneration are Utopian, incoherent and absurd. The best
thing for us to do is to forget these silly dreams and to read Teverino and Le
Secrétaire Intime. Poor M. Caro! This spirit, which he treats with such airy
flippancy, is the very leaven of modern life. It is remoulding the world for us
and fashioning our age anew. If it is antediluvian, it is so because the deluge is
yet to come; if it is Utopian, then Utopia must be added to our geographies. To
what curious straits M. Caro is driven by his violent prejudices may be
estimated by the fact that he tries to class George Sand’s novels with the old
Chansons de geste, the stories of adventure characteristic of primitive
literatures; whereas in using fiction as a vehicle of thought, and romance as a
means of influencing the social ideals of her age, George Sand was merely
carrying out the traditions of Voltaire and Rousseau, of Diderot and of
Chateaubriand. The novel, says M. Caro, must be allied either to poetry or to
science. That it has found in philosophy one of its strongest allies seems not to
have occurred to him. In an English critic such a view might possibly be
excusable. Our greatest novelists, such as Fielding, Scott and Thackeray, cared
little for the philosophy of their age. But coming, as it does, from a French
critic, the statement seems to show a strange want of recognition of one of the
most important elements of French fiction. Nor, even in the narrow limits that
he has imposed upon himself, can M. Caro be said to be a very fortunate or
felicitous critic. To take merely one instance out of many, he says nothing of
George Sand’s delightful treatment of art and the artist’s life. And yet how
exquisitely does she analyse each separate art and present it to us in its relation
to life! In Consuelo she tells us of music; in Horace of authorship; in Le
Château des Désertes of acting; in Les Maîtres Mosaïstes of mosaic work; in
Le Château de Pictordu of portrait painting; and in La Daniella of the painting
of landscape. What Mr. Ruskin and Mr. Browning have done for England she
did for France. She invented an art literature. It is unnecessary, however, to
discuss any of M. Caro’s minor failings, for the whole effect of the book, so
far as it attempts to portray for us the scope and character of George Sand’s
genius, is entirely spoiled by the false attitude assumed from the beginning,
and though the dictum may seem to many harsh and exclusive, we cannot help
feeling that an absolute incapacity for appreciating the spirit of a great writer
is no qualification for writing a treatise on the subject.
As for Madame Sand’s private life, which is so intimately connected with
her art (for, like Goethe, she had to live her romances before she could write
them), M. Caro says hardly anything about it. He passes it over with a
modesty that almost makes one blush, and for fear of wounding the
susceptibilities of those grandes dames whose passions M. Paul Bourget
analyses with such subtlety, he transforms her mother, who was a typical
French grisette, into ‘a very amiable and spirituelle milliner’! It must be
admitted that Joseph Surface himself could hardly show greater tact and
delicacy, though we ourselves must plead guilty to preferring Madame Sand’s
own description of her as an ‘enfant du vieux pavé de Paris.’
A FASCINATING BOOK
(Woman’s World, November 1888.)
Mr. Alan Cole’s carefully-edited translation of M. Lefébure’s history of
Embroidery and Lace is one of the most fascinating books that has appeared
on this delightful subject. M. Lefébure is one of the administrators of the
Musée des Arts Décoratifs at Paris, besides being a lace manufacturer; and his
work has not merely an important historical value, but as a handbook of
technical instruction it will be found of the greatest service by all needlewomen. Indeed, as the translator himself points out, M. Lefébure’s book
suggests the question whether it is not rather by the needle and the bobbin,
than by the brush, the graver or the chisel, that the influence of woman should
assert itself in the arts. In Europe, at any rate, woman is sovereign in the
domain of art-needlework, and few men would care to dispute with her the
right of using those delicate implements so intimately associated with the
dexterity of her nimble and slender fingers; nor is there any reason why the
productions of embroidery should not, as Mr. Alan Cole suggests, be placed
on the same level with those of painting, engraving and sculpture, though there
must always be a great difference between those purely decorative arts that
glorify their own material and the more imaginative arts in which the material
is, as it were, annihilated, and absorbed into the creation of a new form. In the
beautifying of modern houses it certainly must be admitted—indeed, it should
be more generally recognized than it is—that rich embroidery on hangings and
curtains, portières, couches and the like, produces a far more decorative and
far more artistic effect than can be gained from our somewhat wearisome
English practice of covering the walls with pictures and engravings; and the
almost complete disappearance of embroidery from dress has robbed modern
costume of one of the chief elements of grace and fancy.
That, however, a great improvement has taken place in English embroidery
during the last ten or fifteen years cannot, I think, be denied. It is shown, not
merely in the work of individual artists, such as Mrs. Holiday, Miss May
Morris and others, but also in the admirable productions of the South
Kensington School of Embroidery (the best—indeed, the only real good—
school that South Kensington has produced). It is pleasant to note on turning
over the leaves of M. Lefébure’s book, that in this we are merely carrying out
certain old traditions of Early English art. In the seventh century, St. Ethelreda,
first abbess of the monastery of Ely, made an offering to St. Cuthbert of a
sacred ornament she had worked with gold and precious stones, and the cope
and maniple of St. Cuthbert, which are preserved at Durham, are considered to
be specimens of opus Anglicanum. In the year 800, the Bishop of Durham
allotted the income of a farm of two hundred acres for life to an embroideress
named Eanswitha, in consideration of her keeping in repair the vestments of
the clergy in his diocese. The battle standard of King Alfred was embroidered
by Danish Princesses; and the Anglo-Saxon Gudric gave Alcuid a piece of
land, on condition that she instructed his daughter in needle-work. Queen
Mathilda bequeathed to the Abbey of the Holy Trinity at Caen a tunic
embroidered at Winchester by the wife of one Alderet; and when William
presented himself to the English nobles, after the Battle of Hastings, he wore a
mantle covered with Anglo-Saxon embroideries, which is probably, M.
Lefébure suggests, the same as that mentioned in the inventory of the Bayeux
Cathedral, where, after the entry relating to the broderie à telle (representing
the conquest of England), two mantles are described—one of King William,
‘all of gold, powdered with crosses and blossoms of gold, and edged along the
lower border with an orphrey of figures.’ The most splendid example of the
opus Anglicanum now in existence is, of course, the Syon cope at the South
Kensington Museum; but English work seems to have been celebrated all over
the Continent. Pope Innocent iv. so admired the splendid vestments worn by
the English clergy in 1246, that he ordered similar articles from Cistercian
monasteries in England. St. Dunstan, the artistic English monk, was known as
a designer for embroideries; and the stole of St. Thomas à Becket is still
preserved in the cathedral at Sens, and shows us the interlaced scroll-forms
used by Anglo-Saxon MS. illuminators.
How far this modern artistic revival of rich and delicate embroidery will
bear fruit depends, of course, almost entirely on the energy and study that
women are ready to devote to it; but I think that it must be admitted that all
our decorative arts in Europe at present have, at least, this element of strength
—that they are in immediate relationship with the decorative arts of Asia.
Wherever we find in European history a revival of decorative art, it has, I
fancy, nearly always been due to Oriental influence and contact with Oriental
nations. Our own keenly intellectual art has more than once been ready to
sacrifice real decorative beauty either to imitative presentation or to ideal
motive. It has taken upon itself the burden of expression, and has sought to
interpret the secrets of thought and passion. In its marvellous truth of
presentation it has found its strength, and yet its weakness is there also. It is
never with impunity that an art seeks to mirror life. If Truth has her revenge
upon those who do not follow her, she is often pitiless to her worshippers. In
Byzantium the two arts met—Greek art, with its intellectual sense of form, and
its quick sympathy with humanity; Oriental art, with its gorgeous materialism,
its frank rejection of imitation, its wonderful secrets of craft and colour, its
splendid textures, its rare metals and jewels, its marvellous and priceless
traditions. They had, indeed, met before, but in Byzantium they were married;
and the sacred tree of the Persians, the palm of Zoroaster, was embroidered on
the hem of the garments of the Western world. Even the Iconoclasts, the
Philistines of theological history, who, in one of those strange outbursts of
rage against Beauty that seem to occur only amongst European nations, rose
up against the wonder and magnificence of the new art, served merely to
distribute its secrets more widely; and in the Liber Pontificalis, written in 687
by Athanasius, the librarian, we read of an influx into Rome of gorgeous
embroideries, the work of men who had arrived from Constantinople and from
Greece. The triumph of the Mussulman gave the decorative art of Europe a
new departure—that very principle of their religion that forbade the actual
representation of any object in nature being of the greatest artistic service to
them, though it was not, of course, strictly carried out. The Saracens
introduced into Sicily the art of weaving silken and golden fabrics; and from
Sicily the manufacture of fine stuffs spread to the North of Italy, and became
localized in Genoa, Florence, Venice, and other towns. A still greater artmovement took place in Spain under the Moors and Saracens, who brought
over workmen from Persia to make beautiful things for them. M. Lefébure
tells us of Persian embroidery penetrating as far as Andalusia; and Almeria,
like Palermo, had its Hôtel des Tiraz, which rivalled the Hôtel des Tiraz at
Bagdad, tiraz being the generic name for ornamental tissues and costumes
made with them. Spangles (those pretty little discs of gold, silver, or polished
steel, used in certain embroidery for dainty glinting effects) were a Saracenic
invention; and Arabic letters often took the place of letters in the Roman
characters for use in inscriptions upon embroidered robes and Middle Age
tapestries, their decorative value being so much greater. The book of crafts by
Etienne Boileau, provost of the merchants in 1258–1268, contains a curious
enumeration of the different craft-guilds of Paris, among which we find ‘the
tapiciers, or makers of the tapis sarrasinois (or Saracen cloths), who say that
their craft is for the service only of churches, or great men like kings and
counts’; and, indeed, even in our own day, nearly all our words descriptive of
decorative textures and decorative methods point to an Oriental origin. What
the inroads of the Mohammedans did for Sicily and Spain, the return of the
Crusaders did for the other countries of Europe. The nobles who left for
Palestine clad in armour, came back in the rich stuffs of the East; and their
costumes, pouches (aumônières sarrasinoises), and caparisons excited the
admiration of the needle-workers of the West. Matthew Paris says that at the
sacking of Antioch, in 1098, gold, silver and priceless costumes were so
equally distributed among the Crusaders, that many who the night before were
famishing and imploring relief, suddenly found themselves overwhelmed with
wealth; and Robert de Clair tells us of the wonderful fêtes that followed the
capture of Constantinople. The thirteenth century, as M. Lefébure points out,
was conspicuous for an increased demand in the West for embroidery. Many
Crusaders made offerings to churches of plunder from Palestine; and St.
Louis, on his return from the first Crusade, offered thanks at St. Denis to God
for mercies bestowed on him during his six years’ absence and travel, and
presented some richly embroidered stuffs to be used on great occasions as
coverings to the reliquaries containing the relics of holy martyrs. European
embroidery, having thus become possessed of new materials and wonderful
methods, developed on its own intellectual and imitative lines, inclining, as it
went on, to the purely pictorial, and seeking to rival painting, and to produce
landscapes and figure-subjects with elaborate perspective and subtle aerial
effects. A fresh Oriental influence, however, came through the Dutch and the
Portuguese, and the famous Compagnie des Grandes Indes; and M. Lefébure
gives an illustration of a door-hanging now in the Cluny Museum, where we
find the French fleurs-de-lys intermixed with Indian ornament. The hangings
of Madame de Maintenon’s room at Fontainebleau, which were embroidered
at St. Cyr, represent Chinese scenery upon a jonquil-yellow ground.
Clothes were sent out ready cut to the East to be embroidered, and many of
the delightful coats of the period of Louis xv. and Louis xvi. owe their dainty
decoration to the needles of Chinese artists. In our own day the influence of
the East is strongly marked. Persia has sent us her carpets for patterns, and
Cashmere her lovely shawls, and India her dainty muslins finely worked with
gold thread palmates, and stitched over with iridescent beetles’ wings. We are
beginning now to dye by Oriental methods, and the silk robes of China and
Japan have taught us new wonders of colour-combination, and new subtleties
of delicate design. Whether we have yet learned to make a wise use of what
we have acquired is less certain. If books produce an effect, this book of M.
Lefébure should certainly make us study with still deeper interest the whole
question of embroidery, and by those who already work with their needles it
will be found full of most fertile suggestion and most admirable advice.
Even to read of the marvellous works of embroidery that were fashioned in
bygone ages is pleasant. Time has kept a few fragments of Greek embroidery
of the fourth century b.c. for us. One is figured in M. Lefébure’s book—a
chain-stitch embroidery of yellow flax upon a mulberry-coloured worsted
material, with graceful spirals and palmetto-patterns: and another, a tapestried
cloth powdered with ducks, was reproduced in the Woman’s World some
months ago for an article by Mr. Alan Cole. Now and then we find in the tomb
of some dead Egyptian a piece of delicate work. In the treasury at Ratisbon is
preserved a specimen of Byzantine embroidery on which the Emperor
Constantine is depicted riding on a white palfrey, and receiving homage from
the East and West. Metz has a red silk cope wrought with great eagles, the gift
of Charlemagne, and Bayeux the needle-wrought epic of Queen Matilda. But
where is the great crocus-coloured robe, wrought for Athena, on which the
gods fought against the giants? Where is the huge velarium that Nero stretched
across the Colosseum at Rome, on which was represented the starry sky, and
Apollo driving a chariot drawn by steeds? How one would like to see the
curious table-napkins wrought for Heliogabalus, on which were displayed all
the dainties and viands that could be wanted for a feast; or the mortuary-cloth
of King Chilperic, with its three hundred golden bees; or the fantastic robes
that excited the indignation of the Bishop of Pontus, and were embroidered
with ‘lions, panthers, bears, dogs, forests, rocks, hunters—all, in fact, that
painters can copy from nature.’ Charles of Orleans had a coat, on the sleeves
of which were embroidered the verses of a song beginning ‘Madame, je suis
tout joyeux,’ the musical accompaniment of the words being wrought in gold
thread, and each note, of square shape in those days, formed with four pearls.
The room prepared in the palace at Rheims for the use of Queen Joan of
Burgundy was decorated with ‘thirteen hundred and twenty-one papegauts
(parrots) made in broidery and blazoned with the King’s arms, and five
hundred and sixty-one butterflies, whose wings were similarly ornamented
with the Queen’s arms—the whole worked in fine gold.’ Catherine de Medicis
had a mourning-bed made for her ‘of black velvet embroidered with pearls and
powdered with crescents and suns.’ Its curtains were of damask, ‘with leafy
wreaths and garlands figured upon a gold and silver ground, and fringed along
the edges with broideries of pearls,’ and it stood in a room hung with rows of
the Queen’s devices in cut black velvet on cloth of silver. Louis xiv. had goldembroidered caryatides fifteen feet high in his apartment. The state bed of
Sobieski, King of Poland, was made of Smyrna gold brocade embroidered in
turquoises and pearls, with verses from the Koran; its supports were of silvergilt, beautifully chased and profusely set with enamelled and jewelled
medallions. He had taken it from the Turkish camp before Vienna, and the
standard of Mahomet had stood under it. The Duchess de la Ferté wore a dress
of reddish-brown velvet, the skirt of which, adjusted in graceful folds, was
held up by big butterflies made of Dresden china; the front was a tablier of
cloth of silver, upon which was embroidered an orchestra of musicians
arranged in a pyramidal group, consisting of a series of six ranks of
performers, with beautiful instruments wrought in raised needle-work. ‘Into
the night go one and all,’ as Mr. Henley sings in his charming Ballade of Dead
Actors.
Many of the facts related by M. Lefébure about the embroiderers’ guilds
are also extremely interesting. Etienne Boileau, in his book of crafts, to which
I have already alluded, tells us that a member of the guild was prohibited from
using gold of less value than ‘eight sous (about 6s.) the skein; he was bound to
use the best silk, and never to mix thread with silk, because that made the
work false and bad.’ The test or trial piece prescribed for a worker who was
the son of a master-embroiderer was ‘a single figure, a sixth of the natural
size, to be shaded in gold’; whilst one not the son of a master was required to
produce ‘a complete incident with many figures.’ The book of crafts also
mentions ‘cutters-out and stencillers and illuminators’ amongst those
employed in the industry of embroidery. In 1551 the Parisian Corporation of
Embroiderers issued a notice that ‘for the future, the colouring in
representations of nude figures and faces should be done in three or four
gradations of carnation-dyed silk, and not, as formerly, in white silks.’ During
the fifteenth century every household of any position retained the services of
an embroiderer by the year. The preparation of colours also, whether for
painting or for dyeing threads and textile fabrics, was a matter which, M.
Lefébure points out, received close attention from the artists of the Middle
Ages. Many undertook long journeys to obtain the more famous recipes,
which they filed, subsequently adding to and correcting them as experience
dictated. Nor were great artists above making and supplying designs for
embroidery. Raphael made designs for Francis i., and Boucher for Louis xv.;
and in the Ambras collection at Vienna is a superb set of sacerdotal robes from
designs by the brothers Van Eyck and their pupils. Early in the sixteenth
century books of embroidery designs were produced, and their success was so
great that in a few years French, German, Italian, Flemish, and English
publishers spread broadcast books of design made by their best engravers. In
the same century, in order to give the designers opportunity of studying
directly from nature, Jean Robin opened a garden with conservatories, in
which he cultivated strange varieties of plants then but little known in our
latitudes. The rich brocades and brocadelles of the time are characterized by
the introduction of large flowery patterns, with pomegranates and other fruits
with fine foliage.
The second part of M. Lefébure’s book is devoted to the history of lace,
and though some may not find it quite as interesting as the earlier portion it
will more than repay perusal; and those who still work in this delicate and
fanciful art will find many valuable suggestions in it, as well as a large number
of exceedingly beautiful designs. Compared to embroidery, lace seems
comparatively modern. M. Lefébure and Mr. Alan Cole tell us that there is no
reliable or documentary evidence to prove the existence of lace before the
fifteenth century. Of course in the East, light tissues, such as gauzes, muslins,
and nets, were made at very early times, and were used as veils and scarfs
after the manner of subsequent laces, and women enriched them with some
sort of embroidery, or varied the openness of them by here and there drawing
out threads. The threads of fringes seem also to have been plaited and knotted
together, and the borders of one of the many fashions of Roman toga were of
open reticulated weaving. The Egyptian Museum at the Louvre has a curious
network embellished with glass beads; and the monk Reginald, who took part
in opening the tomb of St. Cuthbert at Durham in the twelfth century, writes
that the Saint’s shroud had a fringe of linen threads an inch long, surmounted
by a border, ‘worked upon the threads,’ with representations of birds and pairs
of beasts, there being between each such pair a branching tree, a survival of
the palm of Zoroaster, to which I have before alluded. Our authors, however,
do not in these examples recognize lace, the production of which involves
more refined and artistic methods, and postulates a combination of skill and
varied execution carried to a higher degree of perfection. Lace, as we know it,
seems to have had its origin in the habit of embroidering linen. White
embroidery on linen has, M. Lefébure remarks, a cold and monotonous aspect;
that with coloured threads is brighter and gayer in effect, but is apt to fade in
frequent washing; but white embroidery relieved by open spaces in, or shapes
cut from, the linen ground, is possessed of an entirely new charm; and from a
sense of this the birth may be traced of an art in the result of which happy
contrasts are effected between ornamental details of close texture and others of
open-work.
Soon, also, was suggested the idea that, instead of laboriously withdrawing
threads from stout linen, it would be more convenient to introduce a needlemade pattern into an open network ground, which was called a lacis. Of this
kind of embroidery many specimens are extant. The Cluny Museum possesses
a linen cap said to have belonged to Charles v.; and an alb of linen drawnthread work, supposed to have been made by Anne of Bohemia (1527), is
preserved in the cathedral at Prague. Catherine de Medicis had a bed draped
with squares of réseuil, or lacis, and it is recorded that ‘the girls and servants
of her household consumed much time in making squares of réseuil.’ The
interesting pattern-books for open-ground embroidery, of which the first was
published in 1527 by Pierre Quinty, of Cologne, supply us with the means of
tracing the stages in the transition from white thread embroidery to needlepoint lace. We meet in them with a style of needle-work which differs from
embroidery in not being wrought upon a stuff foundation. It is, in fact, true
lace, done, as it were, ‘in the air,’ both ground and pattern being entirely
produced by the lace-maker.
The elaborate use of lace in costume was, of course, largely stimulated by
the fashion of wearing ruffs, and their companion cuffs or sleeves. Catherine
de Medicis induced one Frederic Vinciolo to come from Italy and make ruffs
and gadrooned collars, the fashion of which she started in France; and Henry
iii. was so punctilious over his ruffs that he would iron and goffer his cuffs and
collars himself rather than see their pleats limp and out of shape. The patternbooks also gave a great impulse to the art. M. Lefébure mentions German
books with patterns of eagles, heraldic emblems, hunting scenes, and plants
and leaves belonging to Northern vegetation; and Italian books, in which the
motifs consist of oleander blossoms, and elegant wreaths and scrolls,
landscapes with mythological scenes, and hunting episodes, less realistic than
the Northern ones, in which appear fauns, and nymphs or amorini shooting
arrows. With regard to these patterns, M. Lefébure notices a curious fact. The
oldest painting in which lace is depicted is that of a lady, by Carpaccio, who
died about 1523. The cuffs of the lady are edged with a narrow lace, the
pattern of which reappears in Vecellio’s Corona, a book not published until
1591. This particular pattern was, therefore, in use at least eighty years before
it got into circulation with other published patterns.
It was not, however, till the seventeenth century that lace acquired a really
independent character and individuality, and M. Duplessis states that the
production of the more noteworthy of early laces owes more to the influence
of men than to that of women. The reign of Louis xiv. witnessed the
production of the most stately needle-point laces, the transformation of
Venetian point, and the growth of Points d’Alençon, d’Argentan, de Bruxelles
and d’Angleterre.
The king, aided by Colbert, determined to make France the centre, if
possible, for lace manufacture, sending for this purpose both to Venice and to
Flanders for workers. The studio of the Gobelins supplied designs. The
dandies had their huge rabatos or bands falling from beneath the chin over the
breast, and great prelates, like Bossuet and Fénelon, wore their wonderful albs
and rochets. It is related of a collar made at Venice for Louis xiv. that the laceworkers, being unable to find sufficiently fine horse-hair, employed some of
their own hairs instead, in order to secure that marvellous delicacy of work
which they aimed at producing.
In the eighteenth century, Venice, finding that laces of lighter texture were
sought after, set herself to make rose-point; and at the Court of Louis xv. the
choice of lace was regulated by still more elaborate etiquette. The Revolution,
however, ruined many of the manufactures. Alençon survived, and Napoleon
encouraged it, and endeavoured to renew the old rules about the necessity of
wearing point-lace at Court receptions. A wonderful piece of lace, powdered
over with devices of bees, and costing 40,000 francs, was ordered. It was
begun for the Empress Josephine, but in the course of its making her
escutcheons were replaced by those of Marie Louise.
M. Lefébure concludes his interesting history by stating very clearly his
attitude towards machine-made lace. ‘It would be an obvious loss to art,’ he
says, ‘should the making of lace by hand become extinct, for machinery, as
skilfully devised as possible, cannot do what the hand does.’ It can give us ‘the
results of processes, not the creations of artistic handicraft.’ Art is absent
‘where formal calculation pretends to supersede emotion’; it is absent ‘where
no trace can be detected of intelligence guiding handicraft, whose hesitancies
even possess peculiar charm . . . cheapness is never commendable in respect of
things which are not absolute necessities; it lowers artistic standard.’ These are
admirable remarks, and with them we take leave of this fascinating book, with
its delightful illustrations, its charming anecdotes, its excellent advice. Mr.
Alan Cole deserves the thanks of all who are interested in art for bringing this
book before the public in so attractive and so inexpensive a form.
HENLEY’S POEMS
(Woman’s World, December 1888.)
‘If I were king,’says Mr. Henley, in one of his most modest rondeaus,
‘Art should aspire, yet ugliness be dear;
Beauty, the shaft, should speed with wit for feather;
And love, sweet love, should never fall to sere,
If I were king.’
And these lines contain, if not the best criticism of his own work, certainly
a very complete statement of his aim and motive as a poet. His little Book of
Verses reveals to us an artist who is seeking to find new methods of expression
and has not merely a delicate sense of beauty and a brilliant, fantastic wit, but
a real passion also for what is horrible, ugly, or grotesque. No doubt,
everything that is worthy of existence is worthy also of art—at least, one
would like to think so—but while echo or mirror can repeat for us a beautiful
thing, to render artistically a thing that is ugly requires the most exquisite
alchemy of form, the most subtle magic of transformation. To me there is
more of the cry of Marsyas than of the singing of Apollo in the earlier poems
of Mr. Henley’s volume, In Hospital: Rhymes and Rhythms, as he calls them.
But it is impossible to deny their power. Some of them are like bright, vivid
pastels; others like charcoal drawings, with dull blacks and murky whites;
others like etchings with deeply-bitten lines, and abrupt contrasts, and clever
colour-suggestions. In fact, they are like anything and everything, except
perfected poems—that they certainly are not. They are still in the twilight.
They are preludes, experiments, inspired jottings in a note-book, and should be
heralded by a design of ‘Genius Making Sketches.’ Rhyme gives architecture
as well as melody to verse; it gives that delightful sense of limitation which in
all the arts is so pleasurable, and is, indeed, one of the secrets of perfection; it
will whisper, as a French critic has said, ‘things unexpected and charming,
things with strange and remote relations to each other,’ and bind them together
in indissoluble bonds of beauty; and in his constant rejection of rhyme, Mr.
Henley seems to me to have abdicated half his power. He is a roi en exil who
has thrown away some of the strings of his lute; a poet who has forgotten the
fairest part of his kingdom.
However, all work criticizes itself. Here is one of Mr. Henley’s inspired
jottings. According to the temperament of the reader, it will serve either as a
model or as the reverse:
As with varnish red and glistening
Dripped his hair; his feet were rigid;
Raised, he settled stiffly sideways:
You could see the hurts were spinal.
He had fallen from an engine,
And been dragged along the metals.
It was hopeless, and they knew it;
So they covered him, and left him.
As he lay, by fits half sentient,
Inarticulately moaning,
With his stockinged feet protruded
Sharp and awkward from the blankets,
To his bed there came a woman,
Stood and looked and sighed a little,
And departed without speaking,
As himself a few hours after.
I was told she was his sweetheart.
They were on the eve of marriage.
She was quiet as a statue,
But her lip was gray and writhen.
In this poem, the rhythm and the music, such as it is, are obvious—perhaps
a little too obvious. In the following I see nothing but ingeniously printed
prose. It is a description—and a very accurate one—of a scene in a hospital
ward. The medical students are supposed to be crowding round the doctor.
What I quote is only a fragment, but the poem itself is a fragment:
So shows the ring
Seen, from behind, round a conjuror
Doing his pitch in the street.
High shoulders, low shoulders, broad shoulders, narrow ones,
Round, square, and angular, serry and shove;
While from within a voice,
Gravely and weightily fluent,
Sounds; and then ceases; and suddenly
(Look at the stress of the shoulders!)
Out of a quiver of silence,
Over the hiss of the spray,
Comes a low cry, and the sound
Of breath quick intaken through teeth
Clenched in resolve. And the master
Breaks from the crowd, and goes,
Wiping his hands,
To the next bed, with his pupils
Flocking and whispering behind him.
Now one can see.
Case Number One
Sits (rather pale) with his bedclothes
Stripped up, and showing his foot
(Alas, for God’s image!)
Swaddled in wet white lint
Brilliantly hideous with red.
Théophile Gautier once said that Flaubert’s style was meant to be read, and
his own style to be looked at. Mr. Henley’s unrhymed rhythms form very
dainty designs, from a typographical point of view. From the point of view of
literature, they are a series of vivid, concentrated impressions, with a keen grip
of fact, a terrible actuality, and an almost masterly power of picturesque
presentation. But the poetic form—what of that?
Well, let us pass to the later poems, to the rondels and rondeaus, the
sonnets and quatorzains, the echoes and the ballades. How brilliant and
fanciful this is! The Toyokuni colour-print that suggested it could not be more
delightful. It seems to have kept all the wilful fantastic charm of the original:
Was I a Samurai renowned,
Two-sworded, fierce, immense of bow?
A histrion angular and profound?
A priest? a porter?—Child, although
I have forgotten clean, I know
That in the shade of Fujisan,
What time the cherry-orchards blow,
I loved you once in old Japan.
As here you loiter, flowing-gowned
And hugely sashed, with pins a-row
Your quaint head as with flamelets crowned,
Demure, inviting—even so,
When merry maids in Miyako
To feel the sweet o’ the year began,
And green gardens to overflow,
I loved you once in old Japan.
Clear shine the hills; the rice-fields round
Two cranes are circling; sleepy and slow,
A blue canal the lake’s blue bound
Breaks at the bamboo bridge; and lo!
Touched with the sundown’s spirit and glow,
I see you turn, with flirted fan,
Against the plum-tree’s bloomy snow . . .
I loved you once in old Japan!
Envoy.
Dear, ’twas a dozen lives ago
But that I was a lucky man
The Toyokuni here will show:
I loved you—once—in old Japan!
This rondel, too—how light it is, and graceful!—
We’ll to the woods and gather may
Fresh from the footprints of the rain.
We’ll to the woods, at every vein
To drink the spirit of the day.
The winds of spring are out at play,
The needs of spring in heart and brain.
We’ll to the woods and gather may
Fresh from the footprints of the rain.
The world’s too near her end, you say?
Hark to the blackbird’s mad refrain!
It waits for her, the vast Inane?
Then, girls, to help her on the way
We’ll to the woods and gather may.
There are fine verses, also, scattered through this little book; some of them
very strong, as—
Out of the night that covers me,
Black as the pit from pole to pole,
I thank whatever gods may be
For my unconquerable soul.
It matters not how strait the gate,
How charged with punishments the scroll,
I am the master of my fate:
I am the captain of my soul.
Others with a true touch of romance, as—
Or ever the knightly years were gone
With the old world to the grave,
I was a king in Babylon,
And you were a Christian slave.
And here and there we come across such felicitous phrases as—
In the sand
The gold prow-griffin claws a hold,
or—
The spires
Shine and are changed,
and many other graceful or fanciful lines, even ‘the green sky’s minor
thirds’ being perfectly right in its place, and a very refreshing bit of affectation
in a volume where there is so much that is natural.
However, Mr. Henley is not to be judged by samples. Indeed, the most
attractive thing in the book is no single poem that is in it, but the strong
humane personality that stands behind both flawless and faulty work alike, and
looks out through many masks, some of them beautiful, and some grotesque,
and not a few misshapen. In the case with most of our modern poets, when we
have analysed them down to an adjective, we can go no further, or we care to
go no further; but with this book it is different. Through these reeds and pipes
blows the very breath of life. It seems as if one could put one’s hand upon the
singer’s heart and count its pulsations. There is something wholesome, virile
and sane about the man’s soul. Anybody can be reasonable, but to be sane is
not common; and sane poets are as rare as blue lilies, though they may not be
quite so delightful.
Let the great winds their worst and wildest blow,
Or the gold weather round us mellow slow;
We have fulfilled ourselves, and we can dare,
And we can conquer, though we may not share
In the rich quiet of the afterglow,
What is to come,
is the concluding stanza of the last rondeau—indeed, of the last poem in
the collection, and the high, serene temper displayed in these lines serves at
once as keynote and keystone to the book. The very lightness and slightness of
so much of the work, its careless moods and casual fancies, seem to suggest a
nature that is not primarily interested in art—a nature, like Sordello’s,
passionately enamoured of life, one to which lyre and lute are things of less
importance. From this mere joy of living, this frank delight in experience for
its own sake, this lofty indifference, and momentary unregretted ardours, come
all the faults and all the beauties of the volume. But there is this difference
between them—the faults are deliberate, and the result of much study; the
beauties have the air of fascinating impromptus. Mr. Henley’s healthy, if
sometimes misapplied, confidence in the myriad suggestions of life gives him
his charm. He is made to sing along the highways, not to sit down and write. If
he took himself more seriously, his work would become trivial.
SOME LITERARY LADIES
(Woman’s World, January 1889.)
In a recent article on English Poetesses, I ventured to suggest that our
women of letters should turn their attention somewhat more to prose and
somewhat less to poetry. Women seem to me to possess just what our literature
wants—a light touch, a delicate hand, a graceful mode of treatment, and an
unstudied felicity of phrase. We want some one who will do for our prose what
Madame de Sévigné did for the prose of France. George Eliot’s style was far
too cumbrous, and Charlotte Brontë’s too exaggerated. However, one must not
forget that amongst the women of England there have been some charming
letter-writers, and certainly no book can be more delightful reading than Mrs.
Ross’s Three Generations of English Women, which has recently appeared.
The three Englishwomen whose memoirs and correspondence Mrs. Ross has
so admirably edited are Mrs. John Taylor, Mrs. Sarah Austin, and Lady Duff
Gordon, all of them remarkable personalities, and two of them women of
brilliant wit and European reputation. Mrs. Taylor belonged to that great
Norwich family about whom the Duke of Sussex remarked that they reversed
the ordinary saying that it takes nine tailors to make a man, and was for many
years one of the most distinguished figures in the famous society of her native
town. Her only daughter married John Austin, the great authority on
jurisprudence, and her salon in Paris was the centre of the intellect and culture
of her day. Lucie Duff Gordon, the only child of John and Sarah Austin,
inherited the talents of her parents. A beauty, a femme d’esprit, a traveller, and
clever writer, she charmed and fascinated her age, and her premature death in
Egypt was really a loss to our literature. It is to her daughter that we owe this
delightful volume of memoirs.
First we are introduced to Mrs. Ross’s great-grandmother, Mrs. Taylor,
who ‘was called, by her intimate friends, “Madame Roland of Norwich,” from
her likeness to the portraits of the handsome and unfortunate Frenchwoman.’
We hear of her darning her boy’s grey worsted stockings while holding her
own with Southey and Brougham, and dancing round the Tree of Liberty with
Dr. Parr when the news of the fall of the Bastille was first known. Amongst
her friends were Sir James Mackintosh, the most popular man of the day, ‘to
whom Madame de Staël wrote, “Il n’y a pas de société sans vous.” “C’est très
ennuyeux de dîner sans vous; la société ne va pas quand vous n’êtes pas là”;’
Sir James Smith, the botanist; Crabb Robinson; the Gurneys; Mrs. Barbauld;
Dr. Alderson and his charming daughter, Amelia Opie; and many other wellknown people. Her letters are extremely sensible and thoughtful. ‘Nothing at
present,’ she says in one of them, ‘suits my taste so well as Susan’s Latin
lessons, and her philosophical old master. . . . When we get to Cicero’s
discussions on the nature of the soul, or Virgil’s fine descriptions, my mind is
filled up. Life is either a dull round of eating, drinking, and sleeping, or a
spark of ethereal fire just kindled. . . . The character of girls must depend upon
their reading as much as upon the company they keep. Besides the intrinsic
pleasure to be derived from solid knowledge, a woman ought to consider it as
her best resource against poverty.’ This is a somewhat caustic aphorism: ‘A
romantic woman is a troublesome friend, as she expects you to be as impudent
as herself, and is mortified at what she calls coldness and insensibility.’ And
this is admirable: ‘The art of life is not to estrange oneself from society, and
yet not to pay too dear for it.’ This, too, is good: ‘Vanity, like curiosity, is
wanted as a stimulus to exertion; indolence would certainly get the better of us
if it were not for these two powerful principles’; and there is a keen touch of
humour in the following: ‘Nothing is so gratifying as the idea that virtue and
philanthropy are becoming fashionable.’ Dr. James Martineau, in a letter to
Mrs. Ross, gives us a pleasant picture of the old lady returning from market
‘weighted by her huge basket, with the shank of a leg of mutton thrust out to
betray its contents,’ and talking divinely about philosophy, poets, politics, and
every intellectual topic of the day. She was a woman of admirable good sense,
a type of Roman matron, and quite as careful as were the Roman matrons to
keep up the purity of her native tongue.
Mrs. Taylor, however, was more or less limited to Norwich. Mrs. Austin
was for the world. In London, Paris, and Germany, she ruled and dominated
society, loved by every one who knew her. ‘She is “My best and brightest” to
Lord Jeffrey; “Dear, fair and wise” to Sydney Smith; “My great ally” to Sir
James Stephen; “Sunlight through waste weltering chaos” to Thomas Carlyle
(while he needed her aid); “La petite mère du genre humain” to Michael
Chevalier; “Liebes Mütterlein” to John Stuart Mill; and “My own Professorin”
to Charles Buller, to whom she taught German, as well as to the sons of Mr.
James Mill.’ Jeremy Bentham, when on his deathbed, gave her a ring with his
portrait and some of his hair let in behind. ‘There, my dear,’ he said, ‘it is the
only ring I ever gave a woman.’ She corresponded with Guizot, Barthelemy de
St. Hilaire, the Grotes, Dr. Whewell, the Master of Trinity, Nassau Senior, the
Duchesse d’Orléans, Victor Cousin, and many other distinguished people. Her
translation of Ranke’s History of the Popes is admirable; indeed, all her
literary work was thoroughly well done, and her edition of her husband’s
Province of Jurisprudence deserves the very highest praise. Two people more
unlike than herself and her husband it would have been difficult to find. He
was habitually grave and despondent; she was brilliantly handsome, fond of
society, in which she shone, and ‘with an almost superabundance of energy
and animal spirits,’ Mrs. Ross tells us. She married him because she thought
him perfect, but he never produced the work of which he was worthy, and of
which she knew him to be worthy. Her estimate of him in the preface to the
Jurisprudence is wonderfully striking and simple. ‘He was never sanguine. He
was intolerant of any imperfection. He was always under the control of severe
love of truth. He lived and died a poor man.’ She was terribly disappointed in
him, but she loved him. Some years after his death, she wrote to M. Guizot:
In the intervals of my study of his works I read his letters to me—fortyfive years of love-letters, the last as tender and passionate as the first. And
how full of noble sentiments! The midday of our lives was clouded and
stormy, full of cares and disappointments; but the sunset was bright and serene
—as bright as the morning, and more serene. Now it is night with me, and
must remain so till the dawn of another day. I am always alone—that is, I live
with him.
The most interesting letters in the book are certainly those to M. Guizot,
with whom she maintained the closest intellectual friendship; but there is
hardly one of them that does not contain something clever, or thoughtful, or
witty, while those addressed to her, in turn, are very interesting. Carlyle writes
her letters full of lamentations, the wail of a Titan in pain, superbly
exaggerated for literary effect.
Literature, one’s sole craft and staff of life, lies broken in abeyance; what
room for music amid the braying of innumerable jackasses, the howling of
innumerable hyænas whetting the tooth to eat them up? Alas for it! it is a sick
disjointed time; neither shall we ever mend it; at best let us hope to mend
ourselves. I declare I sometimes think of throwing down the Pen altogether as
a worthless weapon; and leading out a colony of these poor starving Drudges
to the waste places of their old Mother Earth, when for sweat of their brow
bread will rise for them; it were perhaps the worthiest service that at this
moment could be rendered our old world to throw open for it the doors of the
New. Thither must they come at last, ‘bursts of eloquence’ will do nothing;
men are starving and will try many things before they die. But poor I, ach
Gott! I am no Hengist or Alaric; only a writer of Articles in bad prose; stick to
thy last, O Tutor; the Pen is not worthless, it is omnipotent to those who have
Faith.
Henri Beyle (Stendhal), the great, I am often tempted to think the greatest
of French novelists, writes her a charming letter about nuances. ‘It seems to
me,’ he says, ‘that except when they read Shakespeare, Byron, or Sterne, no
Englishman understands “nuances”; we adore them. A fool says to a woman “I
love you”; the words mean nothing, he might as well say “Olli Batachor”; it is
the nuance which gives force to the meaning.’ In 1839 Mrs. Austin writes to
Victor Cousin: ‘I have seen young Gladstone, a distinguished Tory who wants
to re-establish education based on the Church in quite a Catholic form’; and
we find her corresponding with Mr. Gladstone on the subject of education. ‘If
you are strong enough to provide motives and checks,’ she says to him, ‘you
may do two blessed acts—reform your clergy and teach your people. As it is,
how few of them conceive what it is to teach a people’! Mr. Gladstone replies
at great length, and in many letters, from which we may quote this passage:
You are for pressing and urging the people to their profit against their
inclination: so am I. You set little value upon all merely technical instruction,
upon all that fails to touch the inner nature of man: so do I. And here I find
ground of union broad and deep-laid. . . .
I more than doubt whether your idea, namely that of raising man to social
sufficiency and morality, can be accomplished, except through the ancient
religion of Christ; . . . or whether, the principles of eclecticism are legitimately
applicable to the Gospel; or whether, if we find ourselves in a state of
incapacity to work through the Church, we can remedy the defect by the
adoption of principles contrary to hers. . . .
But indeed I am most unfit to pursue the subject; private circumstances of
no common interest are upon me, as I have become very recently engaged to
Miss Glynne, and I hope your recollections will enable you in some degree to
excuse me.
Lord Jeffrey has a very curious and suggestive letter on popular education,
in which he denies, or at least doubts, the effect of this education on morals.
He, however, supports it on the ground ‘that it will increase the enjoyment of
individuals,’ which is certainly a very sensible claim. Humboldt writes to her
about an old Indian language which was preserved by a parrot, the tribe who
spoke it having been exterminated, and about ‘young Darwin,’ who had just
published his first book. Here are some extracts from her own letters:
I heard from Lord Lansdowne two or three days ago. . . . I think he is ce
que nous avons de mieux. He wants only the energy that great ambition gives.
He says, ‘We shall have a parliament of railway kings’ . . . what can be worse
than that?—The deification of money by a whole people. As Lord Brougham
says, we have no right to give ourselves pharisaical airs. I must give you a
story sent to me. Mrs. Hudson, the railway queen, was shown a bust of Marcus
Aurelius at Lord Westminster’s, on which she said, ‘I suppose that is not the
present Marquis.’ To goûter this, you must know that the extreme vulgar
(hackney coachmen, etc.) in England pronounce ‘marquis’ very like ‘Marcus.’
Dec. 17th.—Went to Savigny’s. Nobody was there but W. Grimm and his
wife and a few men. Grimm told me he had received two volumes of
Norwegian fairy-tales, and that they were delightful. Talking of them, I said,
‘Your children appear to be the happiest in the world; they live in the midst of
fairy-tales.’ ‘Ah,’ said he, ‘I must tell you about that. When we were at
Göttingen, somebody spoke to my little son about his father’s Mährchen. He
had read them but never thought of their being mine. He came running to me,
and said with an offended air, “Father, they say you wrote those fairy-tales;
surely you never invented such silly rubbish?” He thought it below my
dignity.’
Savigny told a Volksmährchen too:
‘St. Anselm was grown old and infirm, and lay on the ground among
thorns and thistles. Der liebe Gott said to him, “You are very badly lodged
there; why don’t you build yourself a house?” “Before I take the trouble,” said
Anselm, “I should like to know how long I have to live.” “About thirty years,”
said Der liebe Gott. “Oh, for so short a time,” replied he, “it’s not worth
while,” and turned himself round among the thistles.’
Dr. Franck told me a story of which I had never heard before. Voltaire had
for some reason or other taken a grudge against the prophet Habakkuk, and
affected to find in him things he never wrote. Somebody took the Bible and
began to demonstrate to him that he was mistaken. ‘C’est égal,’ he said
impatiently, ‘Habakkuk était capable de tout!’
Oct. 30, 1853.
I am not in love with the Richtung (tendency) of our modern novelists.
There is abundance of talent; but writing a pretty, graceful, touching, yet
pleasing story is the last thing our writers nowadays think of. Their novels are
party pamphlets on political or social questions, like Sybil, or Alton Locke, or
Mary Barton, or Uncle Tom; or they are the most minute and painful
dissections of the least agreeable and beautiful parts of our nature, like those
of Miss Brontë—Jane Eyre and Villette; or they are a kind of martyrology, like
Mrs. Marsh’s Emilia Wyndham, which makes you almost doubt whether any
torments the heroine would have earned by being naughty could exceed those
she incurred by her virtue.
Where, oh! where is the charming, humane, gentle spirit that dictated the
Vicar of Wakefield—the spirit which Goethe so justly calls versöhnend
(reconciling), with all the weaknesses and woes of humanity? . . . Have you
read Thackeray’s Esmond? It is a curious and very successful attempt to
imitate the style of our old novelists. . . . Which of Mrs. Gore’s novels are
translated? They are very clever, lively, worldly, bitter, disagreeable, and
entertaining. . . . Miss Austen’s—are they translated? They are not new, and
are Dutch paintings of every-day people—very clever, very true, very
unæsthetic, but amusing. I have not seen Ruth, by Mrs. Gaskell. I hear it much
admired—and blamed. It is one of the many proofs of the desire women now
have to friser questionable topics, and to poser insoluble moral problems.
George Sand has turned their heads in that direction. I think a few broad
scenes or hearty jokes à la Fielding were very harmless in comparison. They
confounded nothing. . . .
The Heir of Redcliffe I have not read. . . . I am not worthy of superhuman
flights of virtue—in a novel. I want to see how people act and suffer who are
as good-for-nothing as I am myself. Then I have the sinful pretension to be
amused, whereas all our novelists want to reform us, and to show us what a
hideous place this world is: Ma foi, je ne le sais que trop, without their help.
The Head of the Family has some merits. . . . But there is too much
affliction and misery and frenzy. The heroine is one of those creatures now so
common (in novels), who remind me of a poor bird tied to a stake (as was
once the cruel sport of boys) to be ‘shyed’ at (i.e. pelted) till it died; only our
gentle lady-writers at the end of all untie the poor battered bird, and assure us
that it is never the worse for all the blows it has had—nay, the better—and that
now, with its broken wings and torn feathers and bruised body, it is going to be
quite happy. No, fair ladies, you know that it is not so—resigned, if you
please, but make me no shams of happiness out of such wrecks.
In politics Mrs. Austin was a philosophical Tory. Radicalism she detested,
and she and most of her friends seem to have regarded it as moribund. ‘The
Radical party is evidently effete,’ she writes to M. Victor Cousin; the probable
‘leader of the Tory party’ is Mr. Gladstone. ‘The people must be instructed,
must be guided, must be, in short, governed,’ she writes elsewhere; and in a
letter to Dr. Whewell, she says that the state of things in France fills ‘me with
the deepest anxiety on one point,—the point on which the permanency of our
institutions and our salvation as a nation turn. Are our higher classes able to
keep the lead of the rest? If they are, we are safe; if not, I agree with my poor
dear Charles Buller—our turn must come. Now Cambridge and Oxford must
really look to this.’ The belief in the power of the Universities to stem the
current of democracy is charming. She grew to regard Carlyle as ‘one of the
dissolvents of the age—as mischievous as his extravagances will let him be’;
speaks of Kingsley and Maurice as ‘pernicious’; and talks of John Stuart Mill
as a ‘demagogue.’ She was no doctrinaire. ‘One ounce of education demanded
is worth a pound imposed. It is no use to give the meat before you give the
hunger.’ She was delighted at a letter of St. Hilaire’s, in which he said, ‘We
have a system and no results; you have results and no system.’ Yet she had a
deep sympathy with the wants of the people. She was horrified at something
Babbage told her of the population of some of the manufacturing towns who
are worked out before they attain to thirty years of age. ‘But I am persuaded
that the remedy will not, cannot come from the people,’she adds. Many of her
letters are concerned with the question of the higher education of women. She
discusses Buckle’s lecture on ‘The Influence of Women upon the Progress of
Knowledge,’ admits to M. Guizot that women’s intellectual life is largely
coloured by the emotions, but adds: ‘One is not precisely a fool because one’s
opinions are greatly influenced by one’s affections. The opinions of men are
often influenced by worse things.’ Dr. Whewell consults her about lecturing
women on Plato, being slightly afraid lest people should think it ridiculous;
Comte writes her elaborate letters on the relation of women to progress; and
Mr. Gladstone promises that Mrs. Gladstone will carry out at Hawarden the
suggestions contained in one of her pamphlets. She was always very practical,
and never lost her admiration for plain sewing.
All through the book we come across interesting and amusing things. She
gets St. Hilaire to order a large, sensible bonnet for her in Paris, which was at
once christened the ‘Aristotelian,’ and was supposed to be the only useful
bonnet in England. Grote has to leave Paris after the coup d’état, he tells her,
because he cannot bear to see the establishment of a Greek tyrant. Alfred de
Vigny, Macaulay, John Stirling, Southey, Alexis de Tocqueville, Hallam, and
Jean Jacques Ampère all contribute to these pleasant pages. She seems to have
inspired the warmest feelings of friendship in those who knew her. Guizot
writes to her: ‘Madame de Staël used to say that the best thing in the world
was a serious Frenchman. I turn the compliment, and say that the best thing in
the world is an affectionate Englishman. How much more an Englishwoman!
Given equal qualities, a woman is always more charming than a man.’
Lucie Austin, afterwards Lady Duff Gordon, was born in 1821. Her chief
playfellow was John Stuart Mill, and Jeremy Bentham’s garden was her
playground. She was a lovely, romantic child, who was always wanting the
flowers to talk to her, and used to invent the most wonderful stories about
animals, of whom she was passionately fond. In 1834 Mrs. Austin decided on
leaving England, and Sydney Smith wrote his immortal letter to the little girl:
Lucie, Lucie, my dear child, don’t tear your frock: tearing frocks is not of
itself a proof of genius. But write as your mother writes, act as your mother
acts: be frank, loyal, affectionate, simple, honest, and then integrity or
laceration of frock is of little import. And Lucie, dear child, mind your
arithmetic. You know in the first sum of yours I ever saw there was a mistake.
You had carried two (as a cab is licensed to do), and you ought, dear Lucie, to
have carried but one. Is this a trifle? What would life be without arithmetic but
a scene of horrors? You are going to Boulogne, the city of debts, peopled by
men who have never understood arithmetic. By the time you return, I shall
probably have received my first paralytic stroke, and shall have lost all
recollection of you. Therefore I now give you my parting advice—don’t marry
anybody who has not a tolerable understanding and a thousand a year. And
God bless you, dear child.
At Boulogne she sat next Heine at table d’hôte. ‘He heard me speak
German to my mother, and soon began to talk to me, and then said, “When
you go back to England, you can tell your friends that you have seen Heinrich
Heine.” I replied, “And who is Heinrich Heine?” He laughed heartily and took
no offence at my ignorance; and we used to lounge on the end of the pier
together, where he told me stories in which fish, mermaids, water-sprites and a
very funny old French fiddler with a poodle were mixed up in the most
fanciful manner, sometimes humorous, and very often pathetic, especially
when the water-sprites brought him greetings from the “Nord See.” He was . .
. so kind to me and so sarcastic to every one else.’ Twenty years afterwards the
little girl whose ‘braune Augen’ Heine had celebrated in his charming poem
Wenn ick an deinem Hause, used to go and see the dying poet in Paris. ‘It does
one good,’ he said to her, ‘to see a woman who does not carry about a broken
heart, to be mended by all sorts of men, like the women here, who do not see
that a total want of heart is their real failing.’ On another occasion he said to
her: ‘I have now made peace with the whole world, and at last also with God,
who sends thee to me as a beautiful angel of death: I shall certainly soon die.’
Lady Duff Gordon said to him: ‘Poor Poet, do you still retain such splendid
illusions, that you transform a travelling Englishwoman into Azrael? That
used not to be the case, for you always disliked us.’ He answered: ‘Yes, I do
not know what possessed me to dislike the English, . . . it really was only
petulance; I never hated them, indeed, I never knew them. I was only once in
England, but knew no one, and found London very dreary, and the people and
the streets odious. But England has revenged herself well; she has sent me
most excellent friends—thyself and Milnes, that good Milnes.’
There are delightful letters from Dicky Doyle here, with the most amusing
drawings, one of the present Sir Robert Peel as he made his maiden speech in
the House being excellent; and the various descriptions of Hassan’s
performances are extremely amusing. Hassan was a black boy, who had been
turned away by his master because he was going blind, and was found by
Lady Duff Gordon one night sitting on her doorstep. She took care of him, and
had him cured, and he seems to have been a constant source of delight to every
one. On one occasion, ‘when Prince Louis Napoleon (the late Emperor of the
French) came in unexpectedly, he gravely said: “Please, my lady, I ran out and
bought twopennyworth of sprats for the Prince, and for the honour of the
house.”’ Here is an amusing letter from Mrs. Norton:
My dear Lucie,—We have never thanked you for the red Pots, which no
early Christian should be without, and which add that finishing stroke to the
splendour of our demesne, which was supposed to depend on a roc’s egg, in
less intelligent times. We have now a warm Pompeian appearance, and the
constant contemplation of these classical objects favours the beauty of the
facial line; for what can be deducted from the great fact, apparent in all the
states of antiquity, that straight noses were the ancient custom, but the logical
assumption that the constant habit of turning up the nose at unsightly objects
—such as the National Gallery and other offensive and obtrusive things—has
produced the modern divergence from the true and proper line of profile? I
rejoice to think that we ourselves are exempt. I attribute this to our love of
Pompeian Pots (on account of the beauty and distinction of this Pot’s shape I
spell it with a big P), which has kept us straight in a world of crookedness. The
pursuit of profiles under difficulties—how much more rare than a pursuit of
knowledge! Talk of setting good examples before our children! Bah! let us set
good Pompeian Pots before our children, and when they grow up they will not
depart from them.
Lady Duff Gordon’s Letters from the Cape, and her brilliant translation of
The Amber Witch, are, of course, well known. The latter book was, with Lady
Wilde’s translation of Sidonia the Sorceress, my favourite romantic reading
when a boy. Her letters from Egypt are wonderfully vivid and picturesque.
Here is an interesting bit of art criticism:
Sheykh Yoosuf laughed so heartily over a print in an illustrated paper from
a picture of Hilton’s of Rebekah at the well, with the old ‘wekeel’ of ‘Sidi
Ibraheem’ (Abraham’s chief servant) kneeling before the girl he was sent to
fetch, like an old fool without his turban, and Rebekah and the other girls in
queer fancy dresses, and the camels with snouts like pigs. ‘If the painter could
not go into “Es Sham” to see how the Arab really look,’ said Sheykh Yoosuf,
‘why did he not paint a well in England, with girls like English peasants—at
least it would have looked natural to English people? and the wekeel would
not seem so like a madman if he had taken off a hat!’ I cordially agree with
Yoosuf’s art criticism. Fancy pictures of Eastern things are hopelessly absurd.
Mrs. Ross has certainly produced a most fascinating volume, and her book
is one of the books of the season. It is edited with tact and judgment.
POETRY AND PRISON
(Pall Mall Gazette, January 3, 1889.)
Prison has had an admirable effect on Mr. Wilfrid Blunt as a poet. The
Love Sonnets of Proteus, in spite of their clever Musset-like modernities and
their swift brilliant wit, were but affected or fantastic at best. They were
simply the records of passing moods and moments, of which some were sad
and others sweet, and not a few shameful. Their subject was not of high or
serious import. They contained much that was wilful and weak. In Vinculis,
upon the other hand, is a book that stirs one by its fine sincerity of purpose, its
lofty and impassioned thought, its depth and ardour of intense feeling.
‘Imprisonment,’ says Mr. Blunt in his preface, ‘is a reality of discipline most
useful to the modern soul, lapped as it is in physical sloth and self-indulgence.
Like a sickness or a spiritual retreat it purifies and ennobles; and the soul
emerges from it stronger and more self-contained.’ To him, certainly, it has
been a mode of purification. The opening sonnets, composed in the bleak cell
of Galway Gaol, and written down on the flyleaves of the prisoner’s prayerbook, are full of things nobly conceived and nobly uttered, and show that
though Mr. Balfour may enforce ‘plain living’ by his prison regulations, he
cannot prevent ‘high thinking’ or in any way limit or constrain the freedom of
a man’s soul. They are, of course, intensely personal in expression. They could
not fail to be so. But the personality that they reveal has nothing petty or
ignoble about it. The petulant cry of the shallow egoist which was the chief
characteristic of the Love Sonnets of Proteus is not to be found here. In its
place we have wild grief and terrible scorn, fierce rage and flame-like passion.
Such a sonnet as the following comes out of the very fire of heart and brain:
God knows, ’twas not with a fore-reasoned plan
I left the easeful dwellings of my peace,
And sought this combat with ungodly Man,
And ceaseless still through years that do not cease
Have warred with Powers and Principalities.
My natural soul, ere yet these strifes began,
Was as a sister diligent to please
And loving all, and most the human clan.
God knows it. And He knows how the world’s tears
Touched me. And He is witness of my wrath,
How it was kindled against murderers
Who slew for gold, and how upon their path
I met them. Since which day the World in arms
Strikes at my life with angers and alarms.
And this sonnet has all the strange strength of that despair which is but the
prelude to a larger hope:
I thought to do a deed of chivalry,
An act of worth, which haply in her sight
Who was my mistress should recorded be
And of the nations. And, when thus the fight
Faltered and men once bold with faces white
Turned this and that way in excuse to flee,
I only stood, and by the foeman’s might
Was overborne and mangled cruelly.
Then crawled I to her feet, in whose dear cause
I made this venture, and ‘Behold,’ I said,
‘How I am wounded for thee in these wars.’
But she, ‘Poor cripple, would’st thou I should wed
A limbless trunk?’ and laughing turned from me.
Yet she was fair, and her name ‘Liberty.’
The sonnet beginning
A prison is a convent without God—
Poverty, Chastity, Obedience
Its precepts are:
is very fine; and this, written just after entering the gaol, is powerful:
Naked I came into the world of pleasure,
And naked come I to this house of pain.
Here at the gate I lay down my life’s treasure,
My pride, my garments and my name with men.
The world and I henceforth shall be as twain,
No sound of me shall pierce for good or ill
These walls of grief. Nor shall I hear the vain
Laughter and tears of those who love me still.
Within, what new life waits me! Little ease,
Cold lying, hunger, nights of wakefulness,
Harsh orders given, no voice to soothe or please,
Poor thieves for friends, for books rules meaningless;
This is the grave—nay, hell. Yet, Lord of Might,
Still in Thy light my spirit shall see light.
But, indeed, all the sonnets are worth reading, and The Canon of Aughrim,
the longest poem in the book, is a most masterly and dramatic description of
the tragic life of the Irish peasant. Literature is not much indebted to Mr.
Balfour for his sophistical Defence of Philosophic Doubt, which is one of the
dullest books we know, but it must be admitted that by sending Mr. Blunt to
gaol he has converted a clever rhymer into an earnest and deep-thinking poet.
The narrow confines of a prison cell seem to suit the ‘sonnet’s scanty plot of
ground,’ and an unjust imprisonment for a noble cause strengthens as well as
deepens the nature.
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO WALT WHITMAN
(Pall Mall Gazette, January 25, 1889.)
‘No one will get to my verses who insists upon viewing them as a literary
performance . . . or as aiming mainly towards art and æstheticism.’ ‘Leaves of
Grass . . . has mainly been the outcropping of my own emotional and other
personal nature—an attempt, from first to last, to put a Person, a human being
(myself, in the latter half of the Nineteenth Century in America,) freely, fully
and truly on record. I could not find any similar personal record in current
literature that satisfied me.’ In these words Walt Whitman gives us the true
attitude we should adopt towards his work, having, indeed, a much saner view
of the value and meaning of that work than either his eloquent admirers or
noisy detractors can boast of possessing. His last book, November Boughs, as
he calls it, published in the winter of the old man’s life, reveals to us, not
indeed a soul’s tragedy, for its last note is one of joy and hope, and noble and
unshaken faith in all that is fine and worthy of such faith, but certainly the
drama of a human soul, and puts on record with a simplicity that has in it both
sweetness and strength the record of his spiritual development, and of the aim
and motive both of the manner and the matter of his work. His strange mode
of expression is shown in these pages to have been the result of deliberate and
self-conscious choice. The ‘barbaric yawp’ which he sent over ‘the roofs of the
world’ so many years ago, and which wrung from Mr. Swinburne’s lip such
lofty panegyric in song and such loud clamorous censure in prose, appears
here in what will be to many an entirely new light. For in his very rejection of
art Walt Whitman is an artist. He tried to produce a certain effect by certain
means and he succeeded. There is much method in what many have termed his
madness, too much method, indeed, some may be tempted to fancy.
In the story of his life, as he tells it to us, we find him at the age of sixteen
beginning a definite and philosophical study of literature:
Summers and falls, I used to go off, sometimes for a week at a stretch,
down in the country, or to Long Island’s seashores—there, in the presence of
outdoor influences, I went over thoroughly the Old and New Testaments, and
absorb’d (probably to better advantage for me than in any library or indoor
room—it makes such difference where you read) Shakspere, Ossian, the best
translated versions I could get of Homer, Eschylus, Sophocles, the old German
Nibelungen, the ancient Hindoo poems, and one or two other masterpieces,
Dante’s among them. As it happen’d, I read the latter mostly in an old wood.
The Iliad . . . I read first thoroughly on the peninsula of Orient, northeast end
of Long Island, in a shelter’d hollow of rock and sand, with the sea on each
side. (I have wonder’d since why I was not overwhelm’d by those mighty
masters. Likely because I read them, as described, in the full presence of
Nature, under the sun, with the far-spreading landscapes and vistas, or the sea
rolling in.)
Edgar Allan Poe’s amusing bit of dogmatism that, for our occasions and
our day, ‘there can be no such thing as a long poem,’ fascinated him. ‘The
same thought had been haunting my mind before,’ he said, ‘but Poe’s
argument . . . work’d the sum out, and proved it to me,’ and the English
translation of the Bible seems to have suggested to him the possibility of a
poetic form which, while retaining the spirit of poetry, would still be free from
the trammels of rhyme and of a definite metrical system. Having thus, to a
certain degree, settled upon what one might call the ‘technique’ of
Whitmanism, he began to brood upon the nature of that spirit which was to
give life to the strange form. The central point of the poetry of the future
seemed to him to be necessarily ‘an identical body and soul, a personality,’ in
fact, which personality, he tells us frankly, ‘after many considerations and
ponderings I deliberately settled should be myself.’ However, for the true
creation and revealing of this personality, at first only dimly felt, a new
stimulus was needed. This came from the Civil War. After describing the
many dreams and passions of his boyhood and early manhood, he goes on to
say:
These, however, and much more might have gone on and come to naught
(almost positively would have come to naught,) if a sudden, vast, terrible,
direct and indirect stimulus for new and national declamatory expression had
not been given to me. It is certain, I say, that although I had made a start
before, only from the occurrence of the Secession War, and what it show’d me
as by flashes of lightning, with the emotional depths it sounded and arous’d
(of course, I don’t mean in my own heart only, I saw it just as plainly in others,
in millions)—that only from the strong flare and provocation of that war’s
sights and scenes the final reasons-for-being of an autochthonic and passionate
song definitely came forth.
I went down to the war fields of Virginia . . . lived thenceforward in camp
—saw great battles and the days and nights afterward—partook of all the
fluctuations, gloom, despair, hopes again arous’d, courage evoked—death
readily risk’d—the cause, too—along and filling those agonistic and lurid
following years . . . the real parturition years . . . of this henceforth
homogeneous Union. Without those three or four years and the experiences
they gave, Leaves of Grass would not now be existing.
Having thus obtained the necessary stimulus for the quickening and
awakening of the personal self, some day to be endowed with universality, he
sought to find new notes of song, and, passing beyond the mere passion for
expression, he aimed at ‘Suggestiveness’ first.
I round and finish little, if anything; and could not, consistently with my
scheme. The reader will have his or her part to do, just as much as I have had
mine. I seek less to state or display any theme or thought, and more to bring
you, reader, into the atmosphere of the theme or thought—there to pursue your
own flight.
Another ‘impetus-word’ is Comradeship, and other ‘word-signs’ are Good
Cheer, Content and Hope. Individuality, especially, he sought for:
I have allow’d the stress of my poems from beginning to end to bear upon
American individuality and assist it—not only because that is a great lesson in
Nature, amid all her generalizing laws, but as counterpoise to the leveling
tendencies of Democracy—and for other reasons. Defiant of ostensible literary
and other conventions, I avowedly chant ‘the great pride of man in himself,’
and permit it to be more or less a motif of nearly all my verse. I think this
pride is indispensable to an American. I think it not inconsistent with
obedience, humility, deference, and self-questioning.
A new theme also was to be found in the relation of the sexes, conceived in
a natural, simple and healthy form, and he protests against poor Mr. William
Rossetti’s attempt to Bowdlerise and expurgate his song.
From another point of view Leaves of Grass is avowedly the song of Sex
and Amativeness, and even Animality—though meanings that do not usually
go along with these words are behind all, and will duly emerge; and all are
sought to be lifted into a different light and atmosphere. Of this feature,
intentionally palpable in a few lines, I shall only say the espousing principle of
those lines so gives breath to my whole scheme that the bulk of the pieces
might as well have been left unwritten were those lines omitted. . . .
Universal as are certain facts and symptoms of communities . . . there is
nothing so rare in modern conventions and poetry as their normal
recognizance. Literature is always calling in the doctor for consultation and
confession, and always giving evasions and swathing suppressions in place of
that ‘heroic nudity’ on which only a genuine diagnosis . . . can be built. And in
respect to editions of Leaves of Grass in time to come (if there should be such)
I take occasion now to confirm those lines with the settled convictions and
deliberate renewals of thirty years, and to hereby prohibit, as far as word of
mine can do so, any elision of them.
But beyond all these notes and moods and motives is the lofty spirit of a
grand and free acceptance of all things that are worthy of existence. He
desired, he says, ‘to formulate a poem whose every thought or fact should
directly or indirectly be or connive at an implicit belief in the wisdom, health,
mystery, beauty of every process, every concrete object, every human or other
existence, not only consider’d from the point of view of all, but of each.’ His
two final utterances are that ‘really great poetry is always . . . the result of a
national spirit, and not the privilege of a polish’d and select few’; and that ‘the
strongest and sweetest songs yet remain to be sung.’
Such are the views contained in the opening essay A Backward Glance
O’er Travel’d Roads, as he calls it; but there are many other essays in this
fascinating volume, some on poets such as Burns and Lord Tennyson, for
whom Walt Whitman has a profound admiration; some on old actors and
singers, the elder Booth, Forrest, Alboni and Mario being his special
favourites; others on the native Indians, on the Spanish element in American
nationality, on Western slang, on the poetry of the Bible, and on Abraham
Lincoln. But Walt Whitman is at his best when he is analysing his own work
and making schemes for the poetry of the future. Literature, to him, has a
distinctly social aim. He seeks to build up the masses by ‘building up grand
individuals.’ And yet literature itself must be preceded by noble forms of life.
‘The best literature is always the result of something far greater than itself—
not the hero but the portrait of the hero. Before there can be recorded history
or poem there must be the transaction.’ Certainly, in Walt Whitman’s views
there is a largeness of vision, a healthy sanity and a fine ethical purpose. He is
not to be placed with the professional littérateurs of his country, Boston
novelists, New York poets and the like. He stands apart, and the chief value of
his work is in its prophecy, not in its performance. He has begun a prelude to
larger themes. He is the herald to a new era. As a man he is the precursor of a
fresh type. He is a factor in the heroic and spiritual evolution of the human
being. If Poetry has passed him by, Philosophy will take note of him.
IRISH FAIRY TALES
(Woman’s World, February 1889.)
‘The various collectors of Irish folk-lore,’ says Mr. W. B. Yeats in his
charming little book Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry, ‘have, from
our point of view, one great merit, and from the point of view of others, one
great fault.’
They have made their work literature rather than science, and told us of the
Irish peasantry rather than of the primitive religion of mankind, or whatever
else the folk-lorists are on the gad after. To be considered scientists they
should have tabulated all their tales in forms like grocers’ bills—item the fairy
king, item the queen. Instead of this they have caught the very voice of the
people, the very pulse of life, each giving what was most noticed in his day.
Croker and Lover, full of the ideas of harum-scarum Irish gentility, saw
everything humorized. The impulse of the Irish literature of their time came
from a class that did not—mainly for political reasons—take the populace
seriously, and imagined the country as a humorist’s Arcadia; its passion, its
gloom, its tragedy, they knew nothing of. What they did was not wholly false;
they merely magnified an irresponsible type, found oftenest among boatmen,
carmen, and gentlemen’s servants, into the type of a whole nation, and created
the stage Irishman. The writers of ’Forty-eight, and the famine combined,
burst their bubble. Their work had the dash as well as the shallowness of an
ascendant and idle class, and in Croker is touched everywhere with beauty—a
gentle Arcadian beauty. Carleton, a peasant born, has in many of his stories, . .
. more especially in his ghost stories, a much more serious way with him, for
all his humour. Kennedy, an old bookseller in Dublin, who seems to have had
a something of genuine belief in the fairies, comes next in time. He has far less
literary faculty, but is wonderfully accurate, giving often the very words the
stories were told in. But the best book since Croker is Lady Wilde’s Ancient
Legends. The humour has all given way to pathos and tenderness. We have
here the innermost heart of the Celt in the moments he has grown to love
through years of persecution, when, cushioning himself about with dreams,
and hearing fairy-songs in the twilight, he ponders on the soul and on the dead.
Here is the Celt, only it is the Celt dreaming.
Into a volume of very moderate dimensions, and of extremely moderate
price, Mr. Yeats has collected together the most characteristic of our Irish
folklore stories, grouping them together according to subject. First come The
Trooping Fairies. The peasants say that these are ‘fallen angels who were not
good enough to be saved, nor bad enough to be lost’; but the Irish antiquarians
see in them ‘the gods of pagan Ireland,’ who, ‘when no longer worshipped and
fed with offerings, dwindled away in the popular imagination, and now are
only a few spans high.’ Their chief occupations are feasting, fighting, making
love, and playing the most beautiful music. ‘They have only one industrious
person amongst them, the lepra-caun—the shoemaker.’ It is his duty to repair
their shoes when they wear them out with dancing. Mr. Yeats tells us that ‘near
the village of Ballisodare is a little woman who lived amongst them seven
years. When she came home she had no toes—she had danced them off.’ On
May Eve, every seventh year, they fight for the harvest, for the best ears of
grain belong to them. An old man informed Mr. Yeats that he saw them fight
once, and that they tore the thatch off a house. ‘Had any one else been near
they would merely have seen a great wind whirling everything into the air as it
passed.’ When the wind drives the leaves and straws before it, ‘that is the
fairies, and the peasants take off their hats and say “God bless them.”’ When
they are gay, they sing. Many of the most beautiful tunes of Ireland ‘are only
their music, caught up by eavesdroppers.’ No prudent peasant would hum The
Pretty Girl Milking the Cow near a fairy rath, ‘for they are jealous, and do not
like to hear their songs on clumsy mortal lips.’ Blake once saw a fairy’s
funeral. But this, as Mr. Yeats points out, must have been an English fairy, for
the Irish fairies never die; they are immortal.
Then come The Solitary Fairies, amongst whom we find the little
Lepracaun mentioned above. He has grown very rich, as he possesses all the
treasure-crocks buried in war-time. In the early part of this century, according
to Croker, they used to show in Tipperary a little shoe forgotten by the fairy
shoemaker. Then there are two rather disreputable little fairies—the Cluricaun,
who gets intoxicated in gentlemen’s cellars, and the Red Man, who plays
unkind practical jokes. ‘The Fear-Gorta (Man of Hunger) is an emaciated
phantom that goes through the land in famine time, begging an alms and
bringing good luck to the giver.’ The Water-sheerie is ‘own brother to the
English Jack-o’-Lantern.’ ‘The Leanhaun Shee (fairy mistress) seeks the love
of mortals. If they refuse, she must be their slave; if they consent, they are
hers, and can only escape by finding another to take their place. The fairy lives
on their life, and they waste away. Death is no escape from her. She is the
Gaelic muse, for she gives inspiration to those she persecutes. The Gaelic
poets die young, for she is restless, and will not let them remain long on earth.’
The Pooka is essentially an animal spirit, and some have considered him the
forefather of Shakespeare’s ‘Puck.’ He lives on solitary mountains, and among
old ruins ‘grown monstrous with much solitude,’ and ‘is of the race of the
nightmare.’ ‘He has many shapes—is now a horse, . . . now a goat, now an
eagle. Like all spirits, he is only half in the world of form.’ The banshee does
not care much for our democratic levelling tendencies; she loves only old
families, and despises the parvenu or the nouveau riche. When more than one
banshee is present, and they wail and sing in chorus, it is for the death of some
holy or great one. An omen that sometimes accompanies the banshee is ‘. . . an
immense black coach, mounted by a coffin, and drawn by headless horses
driven by a Dullahan.’ A Dullahan is the most terrible thing in the world. In
1807 two of the sentries stationed outside St. James’s Park saw one climbing
the railings, and died of fright. Mr. Yeats suggests that they are possibly
‘descended from that Irish giant who swam across the Channel with his head
in his teeth.’
Then come the stories of ghosts, of saints and priests, and of giants. The
ghosts live in a state intermediary between this world and the next. They are
held there by some earthly longing or affection, or some duty unfulfilled, or
anger against the living; they are those who are too good for hell, and too bad
for heaven. Sometimes they ‘take the forms of insects, especially of
butterflies.’ The author of the Parochial Survey of Ireland ‘heard a woman say
to a child who was chasing a butterfly, “How do you know it is not the soul of
your grandfather?” On November eve they are abroad, and dance with the
fairies.’ As for the saints and priests, ‘there are no martyrs in the stories.’ That
ancient chronicler Giraldus Cambrensis ‘taunted the Archbishop of Cashel,
because no one in Ireland had received the crown of martyrdom. “Our people
may be barbarous,” the prelate answered, “but they have never lifted their
hands against God’s saints; but now that a people have come amongst us who
know how to make them (it was just after the English invasion), we shall have
martyrs plentifully.”’ The giants were the old pagan heroes of Ireland, who
grew bigger and bigger, just as the gods grew smaller and smaller. The fact is
they did not wait for offerings; they took them vi et armis.
Some of the prettiest stories are those that cluster round Tír-na-n-Og. This
is the Country of the Young, ‘for age and death have not found it; neither tears
nor loud laughter have gone near it.’ ‘One man has gone there and returned.
The bard, Oisen, who wandered away on a white horse, moving on the surface
of the foam with his fairy Niamh, lived there three hundred years, and then
returned looking for his comrades. The moment his foot touched the earth his
three hundred years fell on him, and he was bowed double, and his beard
swept the ground. He described his sojourn in the Land of Youth to Patrick
before he died.’ Since then, according to Mr. Yeats, ‘many have seen it in
many places; some in the depths of lakes, and have heard rising therefrom a
vague sound of bells; more have seen it far off on the horizon, as they peered
out from the western cliffs. Not three years ago a fisherman imagined that he
saw it.’
Mr. Yeats has certainly done his work very well. He has shown great
critical capacity in his selection of the stories, and his little introductions are
charmingly written. It is delightful to come across a collection of purely
imaginative work, and Mr. Yeats has a very quick instinct in finding out the
best and the most beautiful things in Irish folklore.
I am also glad to see that he has not confined himself entirely to prose, but
has included Allingham’s lovely poem on The Fairies:
Up the airy mountain,
Down the rushy glen,
We daren’t go a-hunting
For fear of little men;
Wee folk, good folk,
Trooping all together;
Green jacket, red cap,
And white owl’s feather!
Down along the rocky shore
Some make their home,
They live on crispy pancakes
Of yellow tide-foam;
Some in the reeds
Of the black mountain lake,
With frogs for their watch-dogs
All night awake.
High on the hill-top
The old King sits;
He is now so old and gray
He’s nigh lost his wits.
With a bridge of white mist
Columbkill he crosses,
On his stately journeys
From Slieveleague to Rosses;
Or going up with music,
On cold starry nights,
To sup with the Queen
Of the gay Northern Lights.
All lovers of fairy tales and folklore should get this little book. The Horned
Women, The Priest’s Soul, and Teig O’Kane, are really marvellous in their
way; and, indeed, there is hardly a single story that is not worth reading and
thinking over.
MR. W. B. YEATS
(Woman’s World, March 1889.)
‘The Wanderings of Oisin and Other Poems is, I believe, the first volume
of poems that Mr. Yeats has published, and it is certainly full of promise. It
must be admitted that many of the poems are too fragmentary, too incomplete.
They read like stray scenes out of unfinished plays, like things only half
remembered, or, at best, but dimly seen. But the architectonic power of
construction, the power to build up and make perfect a harmonious whole, is
nearly always the latest, as it certainly is the highest, development of the
artistic temperament. It is somewhat unfair to expect it in early work. One
quality Mr. Yeats has in a marked degree, a quality that is not common in the
work of our minor poets, and is therefore all the more welcome to us—I mean
the romantic temper. He is essentially Celtic, and his verse, at its best, is Celtic
also. Strongly influenced by Keats, he seems to study how to ‘load every rift
with ore,’ yet is more fascinated by the beauty of words than by the beauty of
metrical music. The spirit that dominates the whole book is perhaps more
valuable than any individual poem or particular passage, but this from The
Wanderings of Oisin is worth quoting. It describes the ride to the Island of
Forgetfulness:
And the ears of the horse went sinking away in the hollow light,
For, as drift from a sailor slow drowning the gleams of the world and the sun,
Ceased on our hands and faces, on hazel and oak leaf, the light,
And the stars were blotted above us, and the whole of the world was one;
Till the horse gave a whinny; for cumbrous with stems of the hazel and oak,
Of hollies, and hazels, and oak-trees, a valley was sloping away
From his hoofs in the heavy grasses, with monstrous slumbering folk,
Their mighty and naked and gleaming bodies heaped loose where they lay.
More comely than man may make them, inlaid with silver and gold,
Were arrow and shield and war-axe, arrow and spear and blade,
And dew-blanched horns, in whose hollows a child of three years old
Could sleep on a couch of rushes, round and about them laid.
And this, which deals with the old legend of the city lying under the waters
of a lake, is strange and interesting:
The maker of the stars and worlds
Sat underneath the market cross,
And the old men were walking, walking,
And little boys played pitch-and-toss.
‘The props,’said He, ‘of stars and worlds
Are prayers of patient men and good.
The boys, the women, and old men,
Listening, upon their shadows stood.
A grey professor passing cried,
‘How few the mind’s intemperance rule!
What shallow thoughts about deep things!
The world grows old and plays the fool.’
The mayor came, leaning his left ear—
There were some talking of the poor—
And to himself cried, ‘Communist!’
And hurried to the guardhouse door.
The bishop came with open book,
Whispering along the sunny path;
There was some talking of man’s God,
His God of stupor and of wrath.
The bishop murmured, ‘Atheist!
How sinfully the wicked scoff!’
And sent the old men on their way,
And drove the boys and women off.
The place was empty now of people;
A cock came by upon his toes;
An old horse looked across the fence,
And rubbed along the rail his nose.
The maker of the stars and worlds
To His own house did Him betake,
And on that city dropped a tear,
And now that city is a lake.
Mr. Yeats has a great deal of invention, and some of the poems in his book,
such as Mosada, Jealousy, and The Island of Statues, are very finely
conceived. It is impossible to doubt, after reading his present volume, that he
will some day give us work of high import. Up to this he has been merely
trying the strings of his instrument, running over the keys.
MR. YEATS’S WANDERINGS OF OISIN
(Pall Mall Gazette, July 12, 1889.)
Books of poetry by young writers are usually promissory notes that are
never met. Now and then, however, one comes across a volume that is so far
above the average that one can hardly resist the fascinating temptation of
recklessly prophesying a fine future for its author. Such a book Mr. Yeats’s
Wanderings of Oisin certainly is. Here we find nobility of treatment and
nobility of subject-matter, delicacy of poetic instinct and richness of
imaginative resource. Unequal and uneven much of the work must be admitted
to be. Mr. Yeats does not try to ‘out-baby’ Wordsworth, we are glad to say; but
he occasionally succeeds in ‘out-glittering’ Keats, and, here and there, in his
book we come across strange crudities and irritating conceits. But when he is
at his best he is very good. If he has not the grand simplicity of epic treatment,
he has at least something of the largeness of vision that belongs to the epical
temper. He does not rob of their stature the great heroes of Celtic mythology.
He is very naïve and very primitive and speaks of his giants with the air of a
child. Here is a characteristic passage from the account of Oisin’s return from
the Island of Forgetfulness:
And I rode by the plains of the sea’s edge, where all is barren and grey,
Grey sands on the green of the grasses and over the dripping trees,
Dripping and doubling landward, as though they would hasten away
Like an army of old men longing for rest from the moan of the seas.
Long fled the foam-flakes around me, the winds fled out of the vast,
Snatching the bird in secret, nor knew I, embosomed apart,
When they froze the cloth on my body like armour riveted fast,
For Remembrance, lifting her leanness, keened in the gates of my heart.
Till fattening the winds of the morning, an odour of new-mown hay
Came, and my forehead fell low, and my tears like berries fell down;
Later a sound came, half lost in the sound of a shore far away,
From the great grass-barnacle calling, and later the shore-winds brown.
If I were as I once was, the gold hooves crushing the sand and the shells,
Coming forth from the sea like the morning with red lips murmuring a song,
Not coughing, my head on my knees, and praying, and wroth with the bells,
I would leave no Saint’s head on his body, though spacious his lands were and
strong.
Making way from the kindling surges, I rode on a bridle-path,
Much wondering to see upon all hands, of wattle and woodwork made,
Thy bell-mounted churches, and guardless the sacred cairn and the earth,
And a small and feeble populace stooping with mattock and spade.
In one or two places the music is faulty, the construction is sometimes too
involved, and the word ‘populace’ in the last line is rather infelicitous; but,
when all is said, it is impossible not to feel in these stanzas the presence of the
true poetic spirit.
MR. WILLIAM MORRIS’S LAST BOOK
(Pall Mall Gazette, March 2, 1889.)
Mr. Morris’s last book is a piece of pure art workmanship from beginning
to end, and the very remoteness of its style from the common language and
ordinary interests of our day gives to the whole story a strange beauty and an
unfamiliar charm. It is written in blended prose and verse, like the mediæval
‘cante-fable,’ and tells the tale of the House of the Wolfings in its struggles
against the legionaries of Rome then advancing into Northern Germany. It is a
kind of Saga, and the language in which the folk-epic, as we may call it, is set
forth recalls the antique dignity and directness of our English tongue four
centuries ago. From an artistic point of view it may be described as an attempt
to return by a self-conscious effort to the conditions of an earlier and a fresher
age. Attempts of this kind are not uncommon in the history of art. From some
such feeling came the Pre-Raphaelite movement of our own day and the
archaistic movement of later Greek sculpture. When the result is beautiful the
method is justified, and no shrill insistence upon a supposed necessity for
absolute modernity of form can prevail against the value of work that has the
incomparable excellence of style. Certainly, Mr. Morris’s work possesses this
excellence. His fine harmonies and rich cadences create in the reader that
spirit by which alone can its own spirit be interpreted, awake in him something
of the temper of romance and, by taking him out of his own age, place him in
a truer and more vital relation to the great masterpieces of all time. It is a bad
thing for an age to be always looking in art for its own reflection. It is well
that, now and then, we are given work that is nobly imaginative in its method
and purely artistic in its aim. As we read Mr. Morris’s story with its fine
alternations of verse and prose, its decorative and descriptive beauties, its
wonderful handling of romantic and adventurous themes, we cannot but feel
that we are as far removed from the ignoble fiction as we are from the ignoble
facts of our own day. We breathe a purer air, and have dreams of a time when
life had a kind of poetical quality of its own, and was simple and stately and
complete.
The tragic interest of The House of the Wolfings centres round the figure
of Thiodolf, the great hero of the tribe. The goddess who loves him gives him,
as he goes to battle against the Romans, a magical hauberk on which rests this
strange fate: that he who wears it shall save his own life and destroy the life of
his land. Thiodolf, finding out this secret, brings the hauberk back to the
Wood-Sun, as she is called, and chooses death for himself rather than the ruin
of his cause, and so the story ends.
But Mr. Morris has always preferred romance to tragedy, and set the
development of action above the concentration of passion. His story is like
some splendid old tapestry crowded with stately images and enriched with
delicate and delightful detail. The impression it leaves on us is not of a single
central figure dominating the whole, but rather of a magnificent design to
which everything is subordinated, and by which everything becomes of
enduring import. It is the whole presentation of the primitive life that really
fascinates. What in other hands would have been mere archæology is here
transformed by quick artistic instinct and made wonderful for us, and human
and full of high interest. The ancient world seems to have come to life again
for our pleasure.
Of a work so large and so coherent, completed with no less perfection than
it is conceived, it is difficult by mere quotation to give any adequate idea.
This, however, may serve as an example of its narrative power. The passage
describes the visit of Thiodolf to the Wood-Sun:
The moonlight lay in a great flood on the grass without, and the dew was
falling in the coldest hour of the night, and the earth smelled sweetly: the
whole habitation was asleep now, and there was no sound to be known as the
sound of any creature, save that from the distant meadow came the lowing of a
cow that had lost her calf, and that a white owl was flitting about near the
eaves of the Roof with her wild cry that sounded like the mocking of
merriment now silent. Thiodolf turned toward the wood, and walked steadily
through the scattered hazel-trees, and thereby into the thick of the beech-trees,
whose boles grew smooth and silver-grey, high and close-set: and so on and on
he went as one going by a well-known path, though there was no path, till all
the moonlight was quenched under the close roof of the beech-leaves, though
yet for all the darkness, no man could go there and not feel that the roof was
green above him. Still he went on in despite of the darkness, till at last there
was a glimmer before him, that grew greater till he came unto a small woodlawn whereon the turf grew again, though the grass was but thin, because little
sunlight got to it, so close and thick were the tall trees round about it. . . .
Nought looked Thiodolf either at the heavens above, or the trees, as he strode
from off the husk-strewn floor of the beech wood on to the scanty grass of the
lawn, but his eyes looked straight before him at that which was amidmost of
the lawn: and little wonder was that; for there on a stone chair sat a woman
exceeding fair, clad in glittering raiment, her hair lying as pale in the
moonlight on the grey stone as the barley acres in the August night before the
reaping-hook goes in amongst them. She sat there as though she were awaiting
some one, and he made no stop nor stay, but went straight up to her, and took
her in his arms, and kissed her mouth and her eyes, and she him again; and
then he sat himself down beside her.
As an example of the beauty of the verse we would take this from the song
of the Wood-Sun. It at least shows how perfectly the poetry harmonizes with
the prose, and how natural the transition is from the one to the other:
In many a stead Doom dwelleth, nor sleepeth day nor night:
The rim of the bowl she kisseth, and beareth the chambering light
When the kings of men wend happy to the bride-bed from the board.
It is little to say that she wendeth the edge of the grinded sword,
When about the house half builded she hangeth many a day;
The ship from the strand she shoveth, and on his wonted way
By the mountain hunter fareth where his foot ne’er failed before:
She is where the high bank crumbles at last on the river’s shore:
The mower’s scythe she whetteth; and lulleth the shepherd to sleep
Where the deadly ling-worm wakeneth in the desert of the sheep.
Now we that come of the God-kin of her redes for ourselves we wot,
But her will with the lives of men-folk and their ending know we not.
So therefore I bid thee not fear for thyself of Doom and her deed.
But for me: and I bid thee hearken to the helping of my need.
Or else—Art thou happy in life, or lusteth thou to die
In the flower of thy days, when thy glory and thy longing bloom on high?
The last chapter of the book in which we are told of the great feast made
for the dead is so finely written that we cannot refrain from quoting this
passage:
Now was the glooming falling upon the earth; but the Hall was bright
within even as the Hall-Sun had promised. Therein was set forth the Treasure
of the Wolfings; fair cloths were hung on the walls, goodly broidered garments
on the pillars: goodly brazen cauldrons and fair-carven chests were set down
in nooks where men could see them well, and vessels of gold and silver were
set all up and down the tables of the feast. The pillars also were wreathed with
flowers, and flowers hung garlanded from the walls over the precious
hangings; sweet gums and spices were burning in fair-wrought censers of
brass, and so many candles were alight under the Roof, that scarce had it
looked more ablaze when the Romans had litten the faggots therein for its
burning amidst the hurry of the Morning Battle.
There then they fell to feasting, hallowing in the high-tide of their return
with victory in their hands: and the dead corpses of Thiodolf and Otter, clad in
precious glittering raiment, looked down on them from the High-seat, and the
kindreds worshipped them and were glad; and they drank the Cup to them
before any others, were they Gods or men.
In days of uncouth realism and unimaginative imitation, it is a high
pleasure to welcome work of this kind. It is a work in which all lovers of
literature cannot fail to delight.
SOME LITERARY NOTES
(Woman’s World, April 1889.)
‘In modern life,’ said Matthew Arnold once, ‘you cannot well enter a
monastery; but you can enter the Wordsworth Society.’ I fear that this will
sound to many a somewhat uninviting description of this admirable and useful
body, whose papers and productions have been recently published by
Professor Knight, under the title of Wordsworthiana. ‘Plain living and high
thinking’ are not popular ideals. Most people prefer to live in luxury, and to
think with the majority. However, there is really nothing in the essays and
addresses of the Wordsworth Society that need cause the public any
unnecessary alarm; and it is gratifying to note that, although the society is still
in the first blush of enthusiasm, it has not yet insisted upon our admiring
Wordsworth’s inferior work. It praises what is worthy of praise, reverences
what should be reverenced, and explains what does not require explanation.
One paper is quite delightful; it is from the pen of Mr. Rawnsley, and deals
with such reminiscences of Wordsworth as still linger among the peasantry of
Westmoreland. Mr. Rawnsley grew up, he tells us, in the immediate vicinity of
the present Poet-Laureate’s old home in Lincolnshire, and had been struck
with the swiftness with which,
As year by year the labourer tills
His wonted glebe, or lops the glades,
the memories of the poet of the Somersby Wold had ‘faded from off the
circle of the hills’—had, indeed, been astonished to note how little real interest
was taken in him or his fame, and how seldom his works were met with in the
houses of the rich or poor in the very neighbourhood. Accordingly, when he
came to reside in the Lake Country, he endeavoured to find out what of
Wordsworth’s memory among the men of the Dales still lingered on—how far
he was still a moving presence among them—how far his works had made
their way into the cottages and farmhouses of the valleys. He also tried to
discover how far the race of Westmoreland and Cumberland farm-folk—the
‘Matthews’ and the ‘Michaels’ of the poet, as described by him—were real or
fancy pictures, or how far the characters of the Dalesmen had been altered in
any remarkable manner by tourist influences during the thirty-two years that
have passed since the Lake poet was laid to rest.
With regard to the latter point, it will be remembered that Mr. Ruskin,
writing in 1876, said that ‘the Border peasantry, painted with absolute fidelity
by Scott and Wordsworth,’ are, as hitherto, a scarcely injured race; that in his
fields at Coniston he had men who might have fought with Henry v. at
Agincourt without being distinguished from any of his knights; that he could
take his tradesmen’s word for a thousand pounds, and need never latch his
garden gate; and that he did not fear molestation, in wood or on moor, for his
girl guests. Mr. Rawnsley, however, found that a certain beauty had vanished
which the simple retirement of old valley days fifty years ago gave to the men
among whom Wordsworth lived. ‘The strangers,’ he says, ‘with their gifts of
gold, their vulgarity, and their requirements, have much to answer for.’ As for
their impressions of Wordsworth, to understand them one must understand the
vernacular of the Lake District. ‘What was Mr. Wordsworth like in personal
appearance?’ said Mr. Rawnsley once to an old retainer, who still lives not far
from Rydal Mount. ‘He was a ugly-faäced man, and a meän-liver,’ was the
answer; but all that was really meant was that he was a man of marked
features, and led a very simple life in matters of food and raiment. Another old
man, who believed that Wordsworth ‘got most of his poetry out of Hartley,’
spoke of the poet’s wife as ‘a very onpleasant woman, very onpleasant indeed.
A close-fisted woman, that’s what she was.’ This, however, seems to have
been merely a tribute to Mrs. Wordsworth’s admirable housekeeping qualities.
The first person interviewed by Mr. Rawnsley was an old lady who had
been once in service at Rydal Mount, and was, in 1870, a lodging-house
keeper at Grasmere. She was not a very imaginative person, as may be
gathered from the following anecdote:—Mr. Rawnsley’s sister came in from a
late evening walk, and said, ‘O Mrs. D---, have you seen the wonderful
sunset?’ The good lady turned sharply round and, drawing herself to her full
height, as if mortally offended, answered: ‘No, miss; I’m a tidy cook, I know,
and “they say” a decentish body for a landlady, but I don’t knaw nothing about
sunsets or them sort of things, they’ve never been in my line.’ Her
reminiscence of Wordsworth was as worthy of tradition as it was explanatory,
from her point of view, of the method in which Wordsworth composed, and
was helped in his labours by his enthusiastic sister. ‘Well, you know,’ she said,
‘Mr. Wordsworth went humming and booing about, and she, Miss Dorothy,
kept close behint him, and she picked up the bits as he let ’em fall, and tak’
’em down, and put ’em together on paper for him. And you may be very well
sure as how she didn’t understand nor make sense out of ’em, and I doubt that
he didn’t know much about them either himself, but, howivver, there’s a great
many folk as do, I dare say.’ Of Wordsworth’s habit of talking to himself, and
composing aloud, we hear a great deal. ‘Was Mr. Wordsworth a sociable
man?’ asked Mr. Rawnsley of a Rydal farmer. ‘Wudsworth, for a’ he had noa
pride nor nowt,’ was the answer, ‘was a man who was quite one to hissel, ye
kna. He was not a man as folks could crack wi’, nor not a man as could crack
wi’ folks. But there was another thing as kep’ folk off, he had a ter’ble girt
deep voice, and ye might see his faace agaan for long enuff. I’ve knoan folks,
village lads and lasses, coming over by old road above, which runs from
Grasmere to Rydal, flayt a’most to death there by Wishing Gaate to hear the
girt voice a groanin’ and mutterin’ and thunderin’ of a still evening. And he
had a way of standin’ quite still by the rock there in t’ path under Rydal, and
folks could hear sounds like a wild beast coming from the rocks, and childer
were scared fit to be dead a’most.’
Wordsworth’s description of himself constantly recurs to one:
And who is he with modest looks,
And clad in sober russet gown?
He murmurs by the running brooks,
A music sweeter than their own;
He is retired as noontide dew,
Or fountain in a noonday grove.
But the corroboration comes in strange guise. Mr. Rawnsley asked one of
the Dalesmen about Wordsworth’s dress and habits. This was the reply:
‘Wudsworth wore a Jem Crow, never seed him in a boxer in my life,—a Jem
Crow and an old blue cloak was his rig, and as for his habits, he had noan;
niver knew him with a pot i’ his hand, or a pipe i’ his mouth. But he was a
greät skater, for a’ that—noan better in these parts—why, he could cut his own
naäme upo’ the ice, could Mr. Wudsworth.’ Skating seems to have been
Wordsworth’s one form of amusement. He was ‘over feckless i’ his hands’—
could not drive or ride—‘not a bit of fish in him,’ and ‘nowt of a mountaineer.’
But he could skate. The rapture of the time when, as a boy, on Esthwaite’s
frozen lake, he had
wheeled about,
Proud and exulting like an untired horse
That cares not for his home, and, shod with steel,
Had hissed along the polished ice,
was continued, Mr. Rawnsley tells us, into manhood’s later day; and Mr.
Rawnsley found many proofs that the skill the poet had gained, when
Not seldom from the uproar he retired,
Into a silent bay, or sportively
Glanced sideways, leaving the tumultuous throng
To cut across the reflex of a star,
was of such a kind as to astonish the natives among whom he dwelt. The
recollection of a fall he once had, when his skate caught on a stone, still
lingers in the district. A boy had been sent to sweep the snow from the White
Moss Tarn for him. ‘Did Mr. Wudsworth gie ye owt?’ he was asked, when he
returned from his labour. ‘Na, but I seed him tumlle, though!’ was the answer.
‘He was a ter’ble girt skater, was Wudsworth now,’ says one of Mr.
Rawnsley’s informants; ‘he would put one hand i’ his breast (he wore a frill
shirt i’ them days), and t’ other hand i’ his waistband, same as shepherds does
to keep their hands warm, and he would stand up straight and sway and swing
away grandly.’
Of his poetry they did not think much, and whatever was good in it they
ascribed to his wife, his sister, and Hartley Coleridge. He wrote poetry, they
said, ‘because he couldn’t help it—because it was his hobby’—for sheer love,
and not for money. They could not understand his doing work ‘for nowt,’ and
held his occupation in somewhat light esteem because it did not bring in ‘a
deal o’ brass to the pocket.’ ‘Did you ever read his poetry, or see any books
about in the farmhouses?’ asked Mr. Rawnsley. The answer was curious: ‘Ay,
ay, time or two. But ya’re weel aware there’s potry and potry. There’s potry
wi’ a li’le bit pleasant in it, and potry sic as a man can laugh at or the childer
understand, and some as takes a deal of mastery to make out what’s said, and a
deal of Wudsworth’s was this sort, ye kna. You could tell fra the man’s faace
his potry would niver have no laugh in it. His potry was quite different work
from li’le Hartley. Hartley ’ud goa running along beside o’ the brooks and mak
his, and goa in the first oppen door and write what he had got upo’ paper. But
Wudsworth’s potry was real hard stuff, and bided a deal of makking, and he’d
keep it in his head for long enough. Eh, but it’s queer, mon, different ways
folks hes of making potry now. . . . Not but what Mr. Wudsworth didn’t stand
very high, and was a well-spoken man enough.’ The best criticism on
Wordsworth that Mr. Rawnsley heard was this: ‘He was an open-air man, and
a great critic of trees.’
There are many useful and well-written essays in Professor Knight’s
volume, but Mr. Rawnsley’s is far the most interesting of all. It gives us a
graphic picture of the poet as he appeared in outward semblance and manner
to those about whom he wrote.
MR. SWINBURNE’S POEMS AND BALLADS (third series)
(Pall Mall Gazette, June 27, 1889.)
Mr. Swinburne once set his age on fire by a volume of very perfect and
very poisonous poetry. Then he became revolutionary and pantheistic, and
cried out against those that sit in high places both in heaven and on earth. Then
he invented Marie Stuart and laid upon us the heavy burden of Bothwell. Then
he retired to the nursery and wrote poems about children of a somewhat oversubtle character. He is now extremely patriotic, and manages to combine with
his patriotism a strong affection for the Tory party. He has always been a great
poet. But he has his limitations, the chief of which is, curiously enough, the
entire lack of any sense of limit. His song is nearly always too loud for his
subject. His magnificent rhetoric, nowhere more magnificent than in the
volume that now lies before us, conceals rather than reveals. It has been said
of him, and with truth, that he is a master of language, but with still greater
truth it may be said that Language is his master. Words seem to dominate him.
Alliteration tyrannizes over him. Mere sound often becomes his lord. He is so
eloquent that whatever he touches becomes unreal.
Let us turn to the poem on the Armada:
The wings of the south-west wind are widened; the breath of his fervent
lips,
More keen than a sword’s edge, fiercer than fire, falls full on the plunging
ships.
The pilot is he of the northward flight, their stay and their steersman he;
A helmsman clothed with the tempest, and girdled with strength to
constrain the sea.
And the host of them trembles and quails, caught fast in his hand as a bird
in the toils:
For the wrath and the joy that fulfil him are mightier than man’s, whom he
slays and spoils.
And vainly, with heart divided in sunder, and labour of wavering will,
The lord of their host takes counsel with hope if haply their star shine still.
Somehow we seem to have heard all this before. Does it come from the
fact that of all the poets who ever lived Mr. Swinburne is the one who is the
most limited in imagery? It must be admitted that he is so. He has wearied us
with his monotony. ‘Fire’ and the ‘Sea’ are the two words ever on his lips. We
must confess also that this shrill singing—marvellous as it is—leaves us out of
breath. Here is a passage from a poem called A Word with the Wind:
Be the sunshine bared or veiled, the sky superb or shrouded,
Still the waters, lax and languid, chafed and foiled,
Keen and thwarted, pale and patient, clothed with fire or clouded,
Vex their heart in vain, or sleep like serpents coiled.
Thee they look for, blind and baffled, wan with wrath and weary,
Blown for ever back by winds that rock the bird:
Winds that seamews breast subdue the sea, and bid the dreary
Waves be weak as hearts made sick with hope deferred.
Let the clarion sound from westward, let the south bear token
How the glories of thy godhead sound and shine:
Bid the land rejoice to see the land-wind’s broad wings broken,
Bid the sea take comfort, bid the world be thine.
Verse of this kind may be justly praised for the sustained strength and
vigour of its metrical scheme. Its purely technical excellence is extraordinary.
But is it more than an oratorical tour de force? Does it really convey much?
Does it charm? Could we return to it again and again with renewed pleasure?
We think not. It seems to us empty.
Of course, we must not look to these poems for any revelation of human
life. To be at one with the elements seems to be Mr. Swinburne’s aim. He
seeks to speak with the breath of wind and wave. The roar of the fire is ever in
his ears. He puts his clarion to the lips of Spring and bids her blow, and the
Earth wakes from her dreams and tells him her secret. He is the first lyric poet
who has tried to make an absolute surrender of his own personality, and he has
succeeded. We hear the song, but we never know the singer. We never even
get near to him. Out of the thunder and splendour of words he himself says
nothing. We have often had man’s interpretation of Nature; now we have
Nature’s interpretation of man, and she has curiously little to say. Force and
Freedom form her vague message. She deafens us with her clangours.
But Mr. Swinburne is not always riding the whirlwind and calling out of
the depths of the sea. Romantic ballads in Border dialect have not lost their
fascination for him, and this last volume contains some very splendid
examples of this curious artificial kind of poetry. The amount of pleasure one
gets out of dialect is a matter entirely of temperament. To say ‘mither’ instead
of ‘mother’seems to many the acme of romance. There are others who are not
quite so ready to believe in the pathos of provincialism. There is, however, no
doubt of Mr. Swinburne’s mastery over the form, whether the form be quite
legitimate or not. The Weary Wedding has the concentration and colour of a
great drama, and the quaintness of its style lends it something of the power of
a grotesque. The ballad of The Witch-Mother, a mediæval Medea who slays
her children because her lord is faithless, is worth reading on account of its
horrible simplicity. The Bride’s Tragedy, with its strange refrain of
In, in, out and in,
Blaws the wind and whirls the whin:
The Jacobite’s Exile—
O lordly flow the Loire and Seine,
And loud the dark Durance:
But bonnier shine the braes of Tyne
Than a’ the fields of France;
And the waves of Till that speak sae still
Gleam goodlier where they glance:
The Tyneside Widow and A Reiver’s Neck-verse are all poems of fine
imaginative power, and some of them are terrible in their fierce intensity of
passion. There is no danger of English poetry narrowing itself to a form so
limited as the romantic ballad in dialect. It is of too vital a growth for that. So
we may welcome Mr. Swinburne’s masterly experiments with the hope that
things which are inimitable will not be imitated. The collection is completed
by a few poems on children, some sonnets, a threnody on John William
Inchbold, and a lovely lyric entitled The Interpreters.
In human thought have all things habitation;
Our days
Laugh, lower, and lighten past, and find no station
That stays.
But thought and faith are mightier things than time
Can wrong,
Made splendid once by speech, or made sublime
By song.
Remembrance, though the tide of change that rolls
Wax hoary,
Gives earth and heaven, for song’s sake and the soul’s,
Their glory.
Certainly, ‘for song’s sake’ we should love Mr. Swinburne’s work, cannot,
indeed, help loving it, so marvellous a music-maker is he. But what of the
soul? For the soul we must go elsewhere.
A CHINESE SAGE
(Speaker, February 8, 1890.)
An eminent Oxford theologian once remarked that his only objection to
modern progress was that it progressed forward instead of backward—a view
that so fascinated a certain artistic undergraduate that he promptly wrote an
essay upon some unnoticed analogies between the development of ideas and
the movements of the common sea-crab. I feel sure the Speaker will not be
suspected even by its most enthusiastic friends of holding this dangerous
heresy of retrogression. But I must candidly admit that I have come to the
conclusion that the most caustic criticism of modern life I have met with for
some time is that contained in the writings of the learned Chuang Tzŭ, recently
translated into the vulgar tongue by Mr. Herbert Giles, Her Majesty’s Consul
at Tamsui.
The spread of popular education has no doubt made the name of this great
thinker quite familiar to the general public, but, for the sake of the few and the
over-cultured, I feel it my duty to state definitely who he was, and to give a
brief outline of the character of his philosophy.
Chuang Tzŭ, whose name must carefully be pronounced as it is not
written, was born in the fourth century before Christ, by the banks of the
Yellow River, in the Flowery Land; and portraits of the wonderful sage seated
on the flying dragon of contemplation may still be found on the simple teatrays and pleasing screens of many of our most respectable suburban
households. The honest ratepayer and his healthy family have no doubt often
mocked at the dome-like forehead of the philosopher, and laughed over the
strange perspective of the landscape that lies beneath him. If they really knew
who he was, they would tremble. Chuang Tzŭ spent his life in preaching the
great creed of Inaction, and in pointing out the uselessness of all useful things.
‘Do nothing, and everything will be done,’ was the doctrine which he inherited
from his great master Lao Tzŭ. To resolve action into thought, and thought
into abstraction, was his wicked transcendental aim. Like the obscure
philosopher of early Greek speculation, he believed in the identity of
contraries; like Plato, he was an idealist, and had all the idealist’s contempt for
utilitarian systems; he was a mystic like Dionysius, and Scotus Erigena, and
Jacob Böhme, and held, with them and with Philo, that the object of life was to
get rid of self-consciousness, and to become the unconscious vehicle of a
higher illumination. In fact, Chuang Tzŭ may be said to have summed up in
himself almost every mood of European metaphysical or mystical thought,
from Heraclitus down to Hegel. There was something in him of the Quietist
also; and in his worship of Nothing he may be said to have in some measure
anticipated those strange dreamers of mediæval days who, like Tauler and
Master Eckhart, adored the purum nihil and the Abyss. The great middle
classes of this country, to whom, as we all know, our prosperity, if not our
civilization, is entirely due, may shrug their shoulders over all this and ask,
with a certain amount of reason, what is the identity of contraries to them, and
why they should get rid of that self-consciousness which is their chief
characteristic. But Chuang Tzŭ was something more than a metaphysician and
an illuminist. He sought to destroy society, as we know it, as the middle
classes know it; and the sad thing is that he combines with the passionate
eloquence of a Rousseau the scientific reasoning of a Herbert Spencer. There
is nothing of the sentimentalist in him. He pities the rich more than the poor, if
he even pities at all, and prosperity seems to him as tragic a thing as suffering.
He has nothing of the modern sympathy with failures, nor does he propose that
the prizes should always be given on moral grounds to those who come in last
in the race. It is the race itself that he objects to; and as for active sympathy,
which has become the profession of so many worthy people in our own day,
he thinks that trying to make others good is as silly an occupation as ‘beating a
drum in a forest in order to find a fugitive.’ It is a mere waste of energy. That
is all. While, as for a thoroughly sympathetic man, he is, in the eyes of Chuang
Tzŭ, simply a man who is always trying to be somebody else, and so misses
the only possible excuse for his own existence.
Yes; incredible as it may seem, this curious thinker looked back with a sigh
of regret to a certain Golden Age when there were no competitive
examinations, no wearisome educational systems, no missionaries, no penny
dinners for the people, no Established Churches, no Humanitarian Societies,
no dull lectures about one’s duty to one’s neighbour, and no tedious sermons
about any subject at all. In those ideal days, he tells us, people loved each
other without being conscious of charity, or writing to the newspapers about it.
They were upright, and yet they never published books upon Altruism. As
every man kept his knowledge to himself, the world escaped the curse of
scepticism; and as every man kept his virtues to himself, nobody meddled in
other people’s business. They lived simple and peaceful lives, and were
contented with such food and raiment as they could get. Neighbouring districts
were in sight, and ‘the cocks and dogs of one could be heard in the other,’ yet
the people grew old and died without ever interchanging visits. There was no
chattering about clever men, and no laudation of good men. The intolerable
sense of obligation was unknown. The deeds of humanity left no trace, and
their affairs were not made a burden for prosperity by foolish historians.
In an evil moment the Philanthropist made his appearance, and brought
with him the mischievous idea of Government. ‘There is such a thing,’ says
Chuang Tzŭ, ‘as leaving mankind alone: there has never been such a thing as
governing mankind.’ All modes of government are wrong. They are
unscientific, because they seek to alter the natural environment of man; they
are immoral because, by interfering with the individual, they produce the most
aggressive forms of egotism; they are ignorant, because they try to spread
education; they are self-destructive, because they engender anarchy. ‘Of old,’
he tells us, ‘the Yellow Emperor first caused charity and duty to one’s
neighbour to interfere with the natural goodness of the heart of man. In
consequence of this, Yao and Shun wore the hair off their legs in endeavouring
to feed their people. They disturbed their internal economy in order to find
room for artificial virtues. They exhausted their energies in framing laws, and
they were failures.’ Man’s heart, our philosopher goes on to say, may be
‘forced down or stirred up,’ and in either case the issue is fatal. Yao made the
people too happy, so they were not satisfied. Chieh made them too wretched,
so they grew discontented. Then every one began to argue about the best way
of tinkering up society. ‘It is quite clear that something must be done,’ they
said to each other, and there was a general rush for knowledge. The results
were so dreadful that the Government of the day had to bring in Coercion, and
as a consequence of this ‘virtuous men sought refuge in mountain caves, while
rulers of state sat trembling in ancestral halls.’ Then, when everything was in a
state of perfect chaos, the Social Reformers got up on platforms, and preached
salvation from the ills that they and their system had caused. The poor Social
Reformers! ‘They know not shame, nor what it is to blush,’ is the verdict of
Chuang Tzŭ upon them.
The economic question, also, is discussed by this almond-eyed sage at
great length, and he writes about the curse of capital as eloquently as Mr.
Hyndman. The accumulation of wealth is to him the origin of evil. It makes
the strong violent, and the weak dishonest. It creates the petty thief, and puts
him in a bamboo cage. It creates the big thief, and sets him on a throne of
white jade. It is the father of competition, and competition is the waste, as well
as the destruction, of energy. The order of nature is rest, repetition, and peace.
Weariness and war are the results of an artificial society based upon capital;
and the richer this society gets, the more thoroughly bankrupt it really is, for it
has neither sufficient rewards for the good nor sufficient punishments for the
wicked. There is also this to be remembered—that the prizes of the world
degrade a man as much as the world’s punishments. The age is rotten with its
worship of success. As for education, true wisdom can neither be learnt nor
taught. It is a spiritual state, to which he who lives in harmony with nature
attains. Knowledge is shallow if we compare it with the extent of the
unknown, and only the unknowable is of value. Society produces rogues, and
education makes one rogue cleverer than another. That is the only result of
School Boards. Besides, of what possible philosophic importance can
education be, when it serves simply to make each man differ from his
neighbour? We arrive ultimately at a chaos of opinions, doubt everything, and
fall into the vulgar habit of arguing; and it is only the intellectually lost who
ever argue. Look at Hui Tzu. ‘He was a man of many ideas. His work would
fill five carts. But his doctrines were paradoxical.’ He said that there were
feathers in an egg, because there were feathers on a chicken; that a dog could
be a sheep, because all names were arbitrary; that there was a moment when a
swift-flying arrow was neither moving nor at rest; that if you took a stick a
foot long, and cut it in half every day, you would never come to the end of it;
and that a bay horse and a dun cow were three, because taken separately they
were two, and taken together they were one, and one and two made up three.
‘He was like a man running a race with his own shadow, and making a noise
in order to drown the echo. He was a clever gadfly, that was all. What was the
use of him?’
Morality is, of course, a different thing. It went out of fashion, says
Chuang Tzŭ, when people began to moralize. Men ceased then to be
spontaneous and to act on intuition. They became priggish and artificial, and
were so blind as to have a definite purpose in life. Then came Governments
and Philanthropists, those two pests of the age. The former tried to coerce
people into being good, and so destroyed the natural goodness of man. The
latter were a set of aggressive busybodies who caused confusion wherever
they went. They were stupid enough to have principles, and unfortunate
enough to act up to them. They all came to bad ends, and showed that
universal altruism is as bad in its results as universal egotism. ‘They tripped
people up over charity, and fettered them with duties to their neighbours.’
They gushed over music, and fussed over ceremonies. As a consequence of all
this, the world lost its equilibrium, and has been staggering ever since.
Who, then, according to Chuang Tzŭ, is the perfect man? And what is his
manner of life? The perfect man does nothing beyond gazing at the universe.
He adopts no absolute position. ‘In motion, he is like water. At rest, he is like a
mirror. And, like Echo, he answers only when he is called upon.’ He lets
externals take care of themselves. Nothing material injures him; nothing
spiritual punishes him. His mental equilibrium gives him the empire of the
world. He is never the slave of objective existences. He knows that, ‘just as
the best language is that which is never spoken, so the best action is that which
is never done.’ He is passive, and accepts the laws of life. He rests in
inactivity, and sees the world become virtuous of itself. He does not try to
‘bring about his own good deeds.’ He never wastes himself on effort. He is not
troubled about moral distinctions. He knows that things are what they are, and
that their consequences will be what they will be. His mind is the ‘speculum of
creation,’ and he is ever at peace.
All this is of course excessively dangerous, but we must remember that
Chuang Tzŭ lived more than two thousand years ago, and never had the
opportunity of seeing our unrivalled civilization. And yet it is possible that,
were he to come back to earth and visit us, he might have something to say to
Mr. Balfour about his coercion and active misgovernment in Ireland; he might
smile at some of our philanthropic ardours, and shake his head over many of
our organized charities; the School Board might not impress him, nor our race
for wealth stir his admiration; he might wonder at our ideals, and grow sad
over what we have realized. Perhaps it is well that Chuang Tzŭ cannot return.
Meanwhile, thanks to Mr. Giles and Mr. Quaritch, we have his book to
console us, and certainly it is a most fascinating and delightful volume.
Chuang Tzŭ is one of the Darwinians before Darwin. He traces man from the
germ, and sees his unity with nature. As an anthropologist he is excessively
interesting, and he describes our primitive arboreal ancestor living in trees
through his terror of animals stronger than himself, and knowing only one
parent, the mother, with all the accuracy of a lecturer at the Royal Society.
Like Plato, he adopts the dialogue as his mode of expression, ‘putting words
into other people’s mouths,’ he tells us, ‘in order to gain breadth of view.’ As a
story-teller he is charming. The account of the visit of the respectable
Confucius to the great Robber Chê is most vivid and brilliant, and it is
impossible not to laugh over the ultimate discomfiture of the sage, the
barrenness of whose moral platitudes is ruthlessly exposed by the successful
brigand. Even in his metaphysics, Chuang Tzŭ is intensely humorous. He
personifies his abstractions, and makes them act plays before us. The Spirit of
the Clouds, when passing eastward through the expanse of air, happened to
fall in with the Vital Principle. The latter was slapping his ribs and hopping
about: whereupon the Spirit of the Clouds said, ‘Who are you, old man, and
what are you doing?’ ‘Strolling!’ replied the Vital Principle, without stopping,
for all activities are ceaseless. ‘I want to know something,’ continued the Spirit
of the Clouds. ‘Ah!’ cried the Vital Principle, in a tone of disapprobation, and
a marvellous conversation follows, that is not unlike the dialogue between the
Sphinx and the Chimera in Flaubert’s curious drama. Talking animals, also,
have their place in Chuang Tzŭ’s parables and stories, and through myth and
poetry and fancy his strange philosophy finds musical utterance.
Of course it is sad to be told that it is immoral to be consciously good, and
that doing anything is the worst form of idleness. Thousands of excellent and
really earnest philanthropists would be absolutely thrown upon the rates if we
adopted the view that nobody should be allowed to meddle in what does not
concern him. The doctrine of the uselessness of all useful things would not
merely endanger our commercial supremacy as a nation, but might bring
discredit upon many prosperous and serious-minded members of the shopkeeping classes. What would become of our popular preachers, our Exeter
Hall orators, our drawing-room evangelists, if we said to them, in the words of
Chuang Tzŭ, ‘Mosquitoes will keep a man awake all night with their biting,
and just in the same way this talk of charity and duty to one’s neighbour drives
us nearly crazy. Sirs, strive to keep the world to its own original simplicity,
and, as the wind bloweth where it listeth, so let Virtue establish itself.
Wherefore this undue energy?’ And what would be the fate of governments
and professional politicians if we came to the conclusion that there is no such
thing as governing mankind at all? It is clear that Chuang Tzŭ is a very
dangerous writer, and the publication of his book in English, two thousand
years after his death, is obviously premature, and may cause a great deal of
pain to many thoroughly respectable and industrious persons. It may be true
that the ideal of self-culture and self-development, which is the aim of his
scheme of life, and the basis of his scheme of philosophy, is an ideal
somewhat needed by an age like ours, in which most people are so anxious to
educate their neighbours that they have actually no time left in which to
educate themselves. But would it be wise to say so? It seems to me that if we
once admitted the force of any one of Chuang Tzŭ’s destructive criticisms we
should have to put some check on our national habit of self-glorification; and
the only thing that ever consoles man for the stupid things he does is the praise
he always gives himself for doing them. There may, however, be a few who
have grown wearied of that strange modern tendency that sets enthusiasm to
do the work of the intellect. To these, and such as these, Chuang Tzŭ will be
welcome. But let them only read him. Let them not talk about him. He would
be disturbing at dinner-parties, and impossible at afternoon teas, and his whole
life was a protest against platform speaking. ‘The perfect man ignores self; the
divine man ignores action; the true sage ignores reputation.’ These are the
principles of Chuang Tzŭ.
MR. PATER’S APPRECIATIONS
(Speaker, March 22, 1890.)
When I first had the privilege—and I count it a very high one—of meeting
Mr. Walter Pater, he said to me, smiling, ‘Why do you always write poetry?
Why do you not write prose? Prose is so much more difficult.’
It was during my undergraduate days at Oxford; days of lyrical ardour and
of studious sonnet-writing; days when one loved the exquisite intricacy and
musical repetitions of the ballade, and the villanelle with its linked long-drawn
echoes and its curious completeness; days when one solemnly sought to
discover the proper temper in which a triolet should be written; delightful
days, in which, I am glad to say, there was far more rhyme than reason.
I may frankly confess now that at the time I did not quite comprehend what
Mr. Pater really meant; and it was not till I had carefully studied his beautiful
and suggestive essays on the Renaissance that I fully realized what a
wonderful self-conscious art the art of English prose-writing really is, or may
be made to be. Carlyle’s stormy rhetoric, Ruskin’s winged and passionate
eloquence, had seemed to me to spring from enthusiasm rather than from art. I
do not think I knew then that even prophets correct their proofs. As for
Jacobean prose, I thought it too exuberant; and Queen Anne prose appeared to
me terribly bald, and irritatingly rational. But Mr. Pater’s essays became to me
‘the golden book of spirit and sense, the holy writ of beauty.’ They are still this
to me. It is possible, of course, that I may exaggerate about them. I certainly
hope that I do; for where there is no exaggeration there is no love, and where
there is no love there is no understanding. It is only about things that do not
interest one, that one can give a really unbiassed opinion; and this is no doubt
the reason why an unbiassed opinion is always valueless.
But I must not allow this brief notice of Mr. Pater’s new volume to
degenerate into an autobiography. I remember being told in America that
whenever Margaret Fuller wrote an essay upon Emerson the printers had
always to send out to borrow some additional capital ‘I’s,’ and I feel it right to
accept this transatlantic warning.