When Mr. Hiram B. Otis, the American Minister, bought Canterville
Chase, every one told him he was doing a very foolish thing, as there was no
doubt at all that the place was haunted. Indeed, Lord Canterville himself, who
was a man of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his duty to mention the
fact to Mr. Otis when they came to discuss terms.
"We have not cared to live in the place ourselves," said Lord Canterville,
"since my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchess of Bolton, was frightened into a
fit, from which she never really recovered, by two skeleton hands being placed
on her shoulders as she was dressing for dinner, and I feel bound to tell you,
Mr. Otis, that the ghost has been seen by several living members of my family,
as well as by the rector of the parish, the Rev. Augustus Dampier, who is a
Fellow of King's College, Cambridge. After the unfortunate accident to the
Duchess, none of our younger servants would stay with us, and Lady
Canterville often got very little sleep at night, in consequence of the
mysterious noises that came from the corridor and the library."
"My Lord," answered the Minister, "I will take the furniture and the ghost
at a valuation. I have come from a modern country, where we have everything
that money can buy; and with all our spry young fellows painting the Old
World red, and carrying off your best actors and prima-donnas, I reckon that if
there were such a thing as a ghost in Europe, we'd have it at home in a very
short time in one of our public museums, or on the road as a show."
"I fear that the ghost exists," said Lord Canterville, smiling, "though it may
have resisted the overtures of your enterprising impresarios. It has been well
known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always makes its appearance
before the death of any member of our family."
"Well, so does the family doctor for that matter, Lord Canterville. But there
is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the laws of Nature are not going to
be suspended for the British aristocracy."
"You are certainly very natural in America," answered Lord Canterville,
who did not quite understand Mr. Otis's last observation, "and if you don't
mind a ghost in the house, it is all right. Only you must remember I warned
you."
**
A few weeks after this, the purchase was concluded, and at the close of the
season the Minister and his family went down to Canterville Chase. Mrs. Otis,
who, as Miss Lucretia R. Tappan, of West 53d Street, had been a celebrated
New York belle, was now a very handsome, middle-aged woman, with fine
eyes, and a superb profile. Many American ladies on leaving their native land
adopt an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the impression that it is a form
of European refinement, but Mrs. Otis had never fallen into this error. She had
a magnificent constitution, and a really wonderful amount of animal spirits.
Indeed, in many respects, she was quite English, and was an excellent example
of the fact that we have really everything in common with America nowadays,
except, of course, language. Her eldest son, christened Washington by his
parents in a moment of patriotism, which he never ceased to regret, was a fairhaired, rather good-looking young man, who had qualified himself for
American diplomacy by leading the German at the Newport Casino for three
successive seasons, and even in London was well known as an excellent
dancer. Gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses. Otherwise he
was extremely sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis was a little girl of fifteen, lithe
and lovely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom in her large blue eyes. She was a
wonderful Amazon, and had once raced old Lord Bilton on her pony twice
round the park, winning by a length and a half, just in front of the Achilles
statue, to the huge delight of the young Duke of Cheshire, who proposed for
her on the spot, and was sent back to Eton that very night by his guardians, in
floods of tears. After Virginia came the twins, who were usually called "The
Star and Stripes," as they were always getting swished. They were delightful
boys, and, with the exception of the worthy Minister, the only true republicans
of the family.
As Canterville Chase is seven miles from Ascot, the nearest railway
station, Mr. Otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and they
started on their drive in high spirits. It was a lovely July evening, and the air
was delicate with the scent of the pinewoods. Now and then they heard a
wood-pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or saw, deep in the rustling
fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant. Little squirrels peered at them from
the beech-trees as they went by, and the rabbits scudded away through the
brushwood and over the mossy knolls, with their white tails in the air. As they
entered the avenue of Canterville Chase, however, the sky became suddenly
overcast with clouds, a curious stillness seemed to hold the atmosphere, a
great flight of rooks passed silently over their heads, and, before they reached
the house, some big drops of rain had fallen.
Standing on the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly dressed in
black silk, with a white cap and apron. This was Mrs. Umney, the
housekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, at Lady Canterville's earnest request, had
consented to keep in her former position. She made them each a low curtsey as
they alighted, and said in a quaint, old-fashioned manner, "I bid you welcome
to Canterville Chase." Following her, they passed through the fine Tudor hall
into the library, a long, low room, panelled in black oak, at the end of which
was a large stained glass window. Here they found tea laid out for them, and,
after taking off their wraps, they sat down and began to look round, while Mrs.
Umney waited on them.
Suddenly Mrs. Otis caught sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by the
fireplace, and, quite unconscious of what it really signified, said to Mrs.
Umney, "I am afraid something has been spilt there."
"Yes, madam," replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, "blood has been
spilt on that spot."
"How horrid!" cried Mrs. Otis; "I don't at all care for blood-stains in a
sitting-room. It must be removed at once."
The old woman smiled, and answered in the same low, mysterious voice,
"It is the blood of Lady Eleanore de Canterville, who was murdered on that
very spot by her own husband, Sir Simon de Canterville, in 1575. Sir Simon
survived her nine years, and disappeared suddenly under very mysterious
circumstances. His body has never been discovered, but his guilty spirit still
haunts the Chase. The blood-stain has been much admired by tourists and
others, and cannot be removed."
"That is all nonsense," cried Washington Otis; "Pinkerton's Champion
Stain Remover and Paragon Detergent will clean it up in no time," and before
the terrified housekeeper could interfere, he had fallen upon his knees, and
was rapidly scouring the floor with a small stick of what looked like a black
cosmetic. In a few moments no trace of the blood-stain could be seen.
"I knew Pinkerton would do it," he exclaimed, triumphantly, as he looked
round at his admiring family; but no sooner had he said these words than a
terrible flash of lightning lit up the sombre room, a fearful peal of thunder
made them all start to their feet, and Mrs. Umney fainted.
"What a monstrous climate!" said the American Minister, calmly, as he lit
a long cheroot. "I guess the old country is so overpopulated that they have not
enough decent weather for everybody. I have always been of opinion that
emigration is the only thing for England."
"My dear Hiram," cried Mrs. Otis, "what can we do with a woman who
faints?"
"Charge it to her like breakages," answered the Minister; "she won't faint
after that;" and in a few moments Mrs. Umney certainly came to. There was
no doubt, however, that she was extremely upset, and she sternly warned Mr.
Otis to beware of some trouble coming to the house.
"I have seen things with my own eyes, sir," she said, "that would make any
Christian's hair stand on end, and many and many a night I have not closed my
eyes in sleep for the awful things that are done here." Mr. Otis, however, and
his wife warmly assured the honest soul that they were not afraid of ghosts,
and, after invoking the blessings of Providence on her new master and
mistress, and making arrangements for an increase of salary, the old
housekeeper tottered off to her own room.
II
The storm raged fiercely all that night, but nothing of particular note
occurred. The next morning, however, when they came down to breakfast,
they found the terrible stain of blood once again on the floor. "I don't think it
can be the fault of the Paragon Detergent," said Washington, "for I have tried it
with everything. It must be the ghost." He accordingly rubbed out the stain a
second time, but the second morning it appeared again. The third morning also
it was there, though the library had been locked up at night by Mr. Otis
himself, and the key carried up-stairs. The whole family were now quite
interested; Mr. Otis began to suspect that he had been too dogmatic in his
denial of the existence of ghosts, Mrs. Otis expressed her intention of joining
the Psychical Society, and Washington prepared a long letter to Messrs. Myers
and Podmore on the subject of the Permanence of Sanguineous Stains when
connected with Crime. That night all doubts about the objective existence of
phantasmata were removed for ever.
The day had been warm and sunny; and, in the cool of the evening, the
whole family went out to drive. They did not return home till nine o'clock,
when they had a light supper. The conversation in no way turned upon ghosts,
so there were not even those primary conditions of receptive expectations
which so often precede the presentation of psychical phenomena. The subjects
discussed, as I have since learned from Mr. Otis, were merely such as form the
ordinary conversation of cultured Americans of the better class, such as the
immense superiority of Miss Fanny Devonport over Sarah Bernhardt as an
actress; the difficulty of obtaining green corn, buckwheat cakes, and hominy,
even in the best English houses; the importance of Boston in the development
of the world-soul; the advantages of the baggage-check system in railway
travelling; and the sweetness of the New York accent as compared to the
London drawl. No mention at all was made of the supernatural, nor was Sir
Simon de Canterville alluded to in any way. At eleven o'clock the family
retired, and by half-past all the lights were out. Some time after, Mr. Otis was
awakened by a curious noise in the corridor, outside his room. It sounded like
the clank of metal, and seemed to be coming nearer every moment. He got up
at once, struck a match, and looked at the time. It was exactly one o'clock. He
was quite calm, and felt his pulse, which was not at all feverish. The strange
noise still continued, and with it he heard distinctly the sound of footsteps. He
put on his slippers, took a small oblong phial out of his dressing-case, and
opened the door. Right in front of him he saw, in the wan moonlight, an old
man of terrible aspect. His eyes were as red burning coals; long grey hair fell
over his shoulders in matted coils; his garments, which were of antique cut,
were soiled and ragged, and from his wrists and ankles hung heavy manacles
and rusty gyves.
"My dear sir," said Mr. Otis, "I really must insist on your oiling those
chains, and have brought you for that purpose a small bottle of the Tammany
Rising Sun Lubricator. It is said to be completely efficacious upon one
application, and there are several testimonials to that effect on the wrapper
from some of our most eminent native divines. I shall leave it here for you by
the bedroom candles, and will be happy to supply you with more, should you
require it." With these words the United States Minister laid the bottle down
on a marble table, and, closing his door, retired to rest.
For a moment the Canterville ghost stood quite motionless in natural
indignation; then, dashing the bottle violently upon the polished floor, he fled
down the corridor, uttering hollow groans, and emitting a ghastly green light.
Just, however, as he reached the top of the great oak staircase, a door was
flung open, two little white-robed figures appeared, and a large pillow whizzed
past his head! There was evidently no time to be lost, so, hastily adopting the
Fourth dimension of Space as a means of escape, he vanished through the
wainscoting, and the house became quite quiet.
On reaching a small secret chamber in the left wing, he leaned up against a
moonbeam to recover his breath, and began to try and realize his position.
Never, in a brilliant and uninterrupted career of three hundred years, had he
been so grossly insulted. He thought of the Dowager Duchess, whom he had
frightened into a fit as she stood before the glass in her lace and diamonds; of
the four housemaids, who had gone into hysterics when he merely grinned at
them through the curtains on one of the spare bedrooms; of the rector of the
parish, whose candle he had blown out as he was coming late one night from
the library, and who had been under the care of Sir William Gull ever since, a
perfect martyr to nervous disorders; and of old Madame de Tremouillac, who,
having wakened up one morning early and seen a skeleton seated in an
armchair by the fire reading her diary, had been confined to her bed for six
weeks with an attack of brain fever, and, on her recovery, had become
reconciled to the Church, and broken off her connection with that notorious
sceptic, Monsieur de Voltaire. He remembered the terrible night when the
wicked Lord Canterville was found choking in his dressing-room, with the
knave of diamonds half-way down his throat, and confessed, just before he
died, that he had cheated Charles James Fox out of £50,000 at Crockford's by
means of that very card, and swore that the ghost had made him swallow it.
All his great achievements came back to him again, from the butler who had
shot himself in the pantry because he had seen a green hand tapping at the
window-pane, to the beautiful Lady Stutfield, who was always obliged to wear
a black velvet band round her throat to hide the mark of five fingers burnt
upon her white skin, and who drowned herself at last in the carp-pond at the
end of the King's Walk. With the enthusiastic egotism of the true artist, he
went over his most celebrated performances, and smiled bitterly to himself as
he recalled to mind his last appearance as "Red Reuben, or the Strangled
Babe," his début as "Guant Gibeon, the Blood-sucker of Bexley Moor," and
the furore he had excited one lovely June evening by merely playing ninepins
with his own bones upon the lawn-tennis ground. And after all this some
wretched modern Americans were to come and offer him the Rising Sun
Lubricator, and throw pillows at his head! It was quite unbearable. Besides, no
ghost in history had ever been treated in this manner. Accordingly, he
determined to have vengeance, and remained till daylight in an attitude of
deep thought.
III
The next morning, when the Otis family met at breakfast, they discussed
the ghost at some length. The United States Minister was naturally a little
annoyed to find that his present had not been accepted. "I have no wish," he
said, "to do the ghost any personal injury, and I must say that, considering the
length of time he has been in the house, I don't think it is at all polite to throw
pillows at him,"—a very just remark, at which, I am sorry to say, the twins
burst into shouts of laughter. "Upon the other hand," he continued, "if he really
declines to use the Rising Sun Lubricator, we shall have to take his chains
from him. It would be quite impossible to sleep, with such a noise going on
outside the bedrooms."
For the rest of the week, however, they were undisturbed, the only thing
that excited any attention being the continual renewal of the blood-stain on the
library floor. This certainly was very strange, as the door was always locked at
night by Mr. Otis, and the windows kept closely barred. The chameleon-like
colour, also, of the stain excited a good deal of comment. Some mornings it
was a dull (almost Indian) red, then it would be vermilion, then a rich purple,
and once when they came down for family prayers, according to the simple
rites of the Free American Reformed Episcopalian Church, they found it a
bright emerald-green. These kaleidoscopic changes naturally amused the party
very much, and bets on the subject were freely made every evening. The only
person who did not enter into the joke was little Virginia, who, for some
unexplained reason, was always a good deal distressed at the sight of the
blood-stain, and very nearly cried the morning it was emerald-green.
The second appearance of the ghost was on Sunday night. Shortly after
they had gone to bed they were suddenly alarmed by a fearful crash in the hall.
Rushing down-stairs, they found that a large suit of old armour had become
detached from its stand, and had fallen on the stone floor, while seated in a
high-backed chair was the Canterville ghost, rubbing his knees with an
expression of acute agony on his face. The twins, having brought their peashooters with them, at once discharged two pellets on him, with that accuracy
of aim which can only be attained by long and careful practice on a writingmaster, while the United States Minister covered him with his revolver, and
called upon him, in accordance with Californian etiquette, to hold up his
hands! The ghost started up with a wild shriek of rage, and swept through
them like a mist, extinguishing Washington Otis's candle as he passed, and so
leaving them all in total darkness. On reaching the top of the staircase he
recovered himself, and determined to give his celebrated peal of demoniac
laughter. This he had on more than one occasion found extremely useful. It
was said to have turned Lord Raker's wig grey in a single night, and had
certainly made three of Lady Canterville's French governesses give warning
before their month was up. He accordingly laughed his most horrible laugh,
till the old vaulted roof rang and rang again, but hardly had the fearful echo
died away when a door opened, and Mrs. Otis came out in a light blue
dressing-gown. "I am afraid you are far from well," she said, "and have
brought you a bottle of Doctor Dobell's tincture. If it is indigestion, you will
find it a most excellent remedy." The ghost glared at her in fury, and began at
once to make preparations for turning himself into a large black dog, an
accomplishment for which he was justly renowned, and to which the family
doctor always attributed the permanent idiocy of Lord Canterville's uncle, the
Hon. Thomas Horton. The sound of approaching footsteps, however, made
him hesitate in his fell purpose, so he contented himself with becoming faintly
phosphorescent, and vanished with a deep churchyard groan, just as the twins
had come up to him.
On reaching his room he entirely broke down, and became a prey to the
most violent agitation. The vulgarity of the twins, and the gross materialism of
Mrs. Otis, were naturally extremely annoying, but what really distressed him
most was that he had been unable to wear the suit of mail. He had hoped that
even modern Americans would be thrilled by the sight of a Spectre in armour,
if for no more sensible reason, at least out of respect for their natural poet
Longfellow, over whose graceful and attractive poetry he himself had whiled
away many a weary hour when the Cantervilles were up in town. Besides it
was his own suit. He had worn it with great success at the Kenilworth
tournament, and had been highly complimented on it by no less a person than
the Virgin Queen herself. Yet when he had put it on, he had been completely
overpowered by the weight of the huge breastplate and steel casque, and had
fallen heavily on the stone pavement, barking both his knees severely, and
bruising the knuckles of his right hand.
For some days after this he was extremely ill, and hardly stirred out of his
room at all, except to keep the blood-stain in proper repair. However, by
taking great care of himself, he recovered, and resolved to make a third
attempt to frighten the United States Minister and his family. He selected
Friday, August 17th, for his appearance, and spent most of that day in looking
over his wardrobe, ultimately deciding in favour of a large slouched hat with a
red feather, a winding-sheet frilled at the wrists and neck, and a rusty dagger.
Towards evening a violent storm of rain came on, and the wind was so high
that all the windows and doors in the old house shook and rattled. In fact, it
was just such weather as he loved. His plan of action was this. He was to make
his way quietly to Washington Otis's room, gibber at him from the foot of the
bed, and stab himself three times in the throat to the sound of low music. He
bore Washington a special grudge, being quite aware that it was he who was in
the habit of removing the famous Canterville blood-stain by means of
Pinkerton's Paragon Detergent. Having reduced the reckless and foolhardy
youth to a condition of abject terror, he was then to proceed to the room
occupied by the United States Minister and his wife, and there to place a
clammy hand on Mrs. Otis's forehead, while he hissed into her trembling
husband's ear the awful secrets of the charnel-house. With regard to little
Virginia, he had not quite made up his mind. She had never insulted him in
any way, and was pretty and gentle. A few hollow groans from the wardrobe,
he thought, would be more than sufficient, or, if that failed to wake her, he
might grabble at the counterpane with palsy-twitching fingers. As for the
twins, he was quite determined to teach them a lesson. The first thing to be
done was, of course, to sit upon their chests, so as to produce the stifling
sensation of nightmare. Then, as their beds were quite close to each other, to
stand between them in the form of a green, icy-cold corpse, till they became
paralyzed with fear, and finally, to throw off the winding-sheet, and crawl
round the room, with white, bleached bones and one rolling eyeball, in the
character of "Dumb Daniel, or the Suicide's Skeleton," a rôle in which he had
on more than one occasion produced a great effect, and which he considered
quite equal to his famous part of "Martin the Maniac, or the Masked Mystery."
**
At half-past ten he heard the family going to bed. For some time he was
disturbed by wild shrieks of laughter from the twins, who, with the light-
hearted gaiety of schoolboys, were evidently amusing themselves before they
retired to rest, but at a quarter-past eleven all was still, and, as midnight
sounded, he sallied forth. The owl beat against the window-panes, the raven
croaked from the old yew-tree, and the wind wandered moaning round the
house like a lost soul; but the Otis family slept unconscious of their doom, and
high above the rain and storm he could hear the steady snoring of the Minister
for the United States. He stepped stealthily out of the wainscoting, with an evil
smile on his cruel, wrinkled mouth, and the moon hid her face in a cloud as he
stole past the great oriel window, where his own arms and those of his
murdered wife were blazoned in azure and gold. On and on he glided, like an
evil shadow, the very darkness seeming to loathe him as he passed. Once he
thought he heard something call, and stopped; but it was only the baying of a
dog from the Red Farm, and he went on, muttering strange sixteenth-century
curses, and ever and anon brandishing the rusty dagger in the midnight air.
Finally he reached the corner of the passage that led to luckless Washington's
room. For a moment he paused there, the wind blowing his long grey locks
about his head, and twisting into grotesque and fantastic folds the nameless
horror of the dead man's shroud. Then the clock struck the quarter, and he felt
the time was come. He chuckled to himself, and turned the corner; but no
sooner had he done so than, with a piteous wail of terror, he fell back, and hid
his blanched face in his long, bony hands. Right in front of him was standing a
horrible spectre, motionless as a carven image, and monstrous as a madman's
dream! Its head was bald and burnished; its face round, and fat, and white; and
hideous laughter seemed to have writhed its features into an eternal grin. From
the eyes streamed rays of scarlet light, the mouth was a wide well of fire, and a
hideous garment, like to his own, swathed with its silent snows the Titan form.
On its breast was a placard with strange writing in antique characters, some
scroll of shame it seemed, some record of wild sins, some awful calendar of
crime, and, with its right hand, it bore aloft a falchion of gleaming steel.
Never having seen a ghost before, he naturally was terribly frightened, and,
after a second hasty glance at the awful phantom, he fled back to his room,
tripping up in his long winding-sheet as he sped down the corridor, and finally
dropping the rusty dagger into the Minister's jack-boots, where it was found in
the morning by the butler. Once in the privacy of his own apartment, he flung
himself down on a small pallet-bed, and hid his face under the clothes. After a
time, however, the brave old Canterville spirit asserted itself, and he
determined to go and speak to the other ghost as soon as it was daylight.
Accordingly, just as the dawn was touching the hills with silver, he returned
towards the spot where he had first laid eyes on the grisly phantom, feeling
that, after all, two ghosts were better than one, and that, by the aid of his new
friend, he might safely grapple with the twins. On reaching the spot, however,
a terrible sight met his gaze. Something had evidently happened to the spectre,
for the light had entirely faded from its hollow eyes, the gleaming falchion had
fallen from its hand, and it was leaning up against the wall in a strained and
uncomfortable attitude. He rushed forward and seized it in his arms, when, to
his horror, the head slipped off and rolled on the floor, the body assumed a
recumbent posture, and he found himself clasping a white dimity bed-curtain,
with a sweeping-brush, a kitchen cleaver, and a hollow turnip lying at his feet!
Unable to understand this curious transformation, he clutched the placard with
feverish haste, and there, in the grey morning light, he read these fearful
words:—
YE OTIS GHOSTE
Ye Onlie True and Originale Spook,
Beware of Ye Imitationes.
All others are counterfeite.
The whole thing flashed across him. He had been tricked, foiled, and outwitted! The old Canterville look came into his eyes; he ground his toothless
gums together; and, raising his withered hands high above his head, swore
according to the picturesque phraseology of the antique school, that, when
Chanticleer had sounded twice his merry horn, deeds of blood would be
wrought, and murder walk abroad with silent feet.
Hardly had he finished this awful oath when, from the red-tiled roof of a
distant homestead, a cock crew. He laughed a long, low, bitter laugh, and
waited. Hour after hour he waited, but the cock, for some strange reason, did
not crow again. Finally, at half-past seven, the arrival of the housemaids made
him give up his fearful vigil, and he stalked back to his room, thinking of his
vain oath and baffled purpose. There he consulted several books of ancient
chivalry, of which he was exceedingly fond, and found that, on every occasion
on which this oath had been used, Chanticleer had always crowed a second
time. "Perdition seize the naughty fowl," he muttered, "I have seen the day
when, with my stout spear, I would have run him through the gorge, and made
him crow for me an 'twere in death!" He then retired to a comfortable lead
coffin, and stayed there till evening.
IV
The next day the ghost was very weak and tired. The terrible excitement of
the last four weeks was beginning to have its effect. His nerves were
completely shattered, and he started at the slightest noise. For five days he
kept his room, and at last made up his mind to give up the point of the blood-
stain on the library floor. If the Otis family did not want it, they clearly did not
deserve it. They were evidently people on a low, material plane of existence,
and quite incapable of appreciating the symbolic value of sensuous
phenomena. The question of phantasmic apparitions, and the development of
astral bodies, was of course quite a different matter, and really not under his
control. It was his solemn duty to appear in the corridor once a week, and to
gibber from the large oriel window on the first and third Wednesdays in every
month, and he did not see how he could honourably escape from his
obligations. It is quite true that his life had been very evil, but, upon the other
hand, he was most conscientious in all things connected with the supernatural.
For the next three Saturdays, accordingly, he traversed the corridor as usual
between midnight and three o'clock, taking every possible precaution against
being either heard or seen. He removed his boots, trod as lightly as possible on
the old worm-eaten boards, wore a large black velvet cloak, and was careful to
use the Rising Sun Lubricator for oiling his chains. I am bound to
acknowledge that it was with a good deal of difficulty that he brought himself
to adopt this last mode of protection. However, one night, while the family
were at dinner, he slipped into Mr. Otis's bedroom and carried off the bottle.
He felt a little humiliated at first, but afterwards was sensible enough to see
that there was a great deal to be said for the invention, and, to a certain degree,
it served his purpose. Still in spite of everything he was not left unmolested.
Strings were continually being stretched across the corridor, over which he
tripped in the dark, and on one occasion, while dressed for the part of "Black
Isaac, or the Huntsman of Hogley Woods," he met with a severe fall, through
treading on a butter-slide, which the twins had constructed from the entrance
of the Tapestry Chamber to the top of the oak staircase. This last insult so
enraged him, that he resolved to make one final effort to assert his dignity and
social position, and determined to visit the insolent young Etonians the next
night in his celebrated character of "Reckless Rupert, or the Headless Earl."
He had not appeared in this disguise for more than seventy years; in fact,
not since he had so frightened pretty Lady Barbara Modish by means of it, that
she suddenly broke off her engagement with the present Lord Canterville's
grandfather, and ran away to Gretna Green with handsome Jack Castletown,
declaring that nothing in the world would induce her to marry into a family
that allowed such a horrible phantom to walk up and down the terrace at
twilight. Poor Jack was afterwards shot in a duel by Lord Canterville on
Wandsworth Common, and Lady Barbara died of a broken heart at Tunbridge
Wells before the year was out, so, in every way, it had been a great success. It
was, however an extremely difficult "make-up," if I may use such a theatrical
expression in connection with one of the greatest mysteries of the
supernatural, or, to employ a more scientific term, the higher-natural world,
and it took him fully three hours to make his preparations. At last everything
was ready, and he was very pleased with his appearance. The big leather
riding-boots that went with the dress were just a little too large for him, and he
could only find one of the two horse-pistols, but, on the whole, he was quite
satisfied, and at a quarter-past one he glided out of the wainscoting and crept
down the corridor. On reaching the room occupied by the twins, which I
should mention was called the Blue Bed Chamber, on account of the colour of
its hangings, he found the door just ajar. Wishing to make an effective
entrance, he flung it wide open, when a heavy jug of water fell right down on
him, wetting him to the skin, and just missing his left shoulder by a couple of
inches. At the same moment he heard stifled shrieks of laughter proceeding
from the four-post bed. The shock to his nervous system was so great that he
fled back to his room as hard as he could go, and the next day he was laid up
with a severe cold. The only thing that at all consoled him in the whole affair
was the fact that he had not brought his head with him, for, had he done so, the
consequences might have been very serious.
He now gave up all hope of ever frightening this rude American family,
and contented himself, as a rule, with creeping about the passages in list
slippers, with a thick red muffler round his throat for fear of draughts, and a
small arquebuse, in case he should be attacked by the twins. The final blow he
received occurred on the 19th of September. He had gone down-stairs to the
great entrance-hall, feeling sure that there, at any rate, he would be quite
unmolested, and was amusing himself by making satirical remarks on the large
Saroni photographs of the United States Minister and his wife which had now
taken the place of the Canterville family pictures. He was simply but neatly
clad in a long shroud, spotted with churchyard mould, had tied up his jaw with
a strip of yellow linen, and carried a small lantern and a sexton's spade. In fact,
he was dressed for the character of "Jonas the Graveless, or the CorpseSnatcher of Chertsey Barn," one of his most remarkable impersonations, and
one which the Cantervilles had every reason to remember, as it was the real
origin of their quarrel with their neighbour, Lord Rufford. It was about a
quarter-past two o'clock in the morning, and, as far as he could ascertain, no
one was stirring. As he was strolling towards the library, however, to see if
there were any traces left of the blood-stain, suddenly there leaped out on him
from a dark corner two figures, who waved their arms wildly above their
heads, and shrieked out "BOO!" in his ear.
Seized with a panic, which, under the circumstances, was only natural, he
rushed for the staircase, but found Washington Otis waiting for him there with
the big garden-syringe, and being thus hemmed in by his enemies on every
side, and driven almost to bay, he vanished into the great iron stove, which,
fortunately for him, was not lit, and had to make his way home through the
flues and chimneys, arriving at his own room in a terrible state of dirt,
disorder, and despair.
After this he was not seen again on any nocturnal expedition. The twins lay
in wait for him on several occasions, and strewed the passages with nutshells
every night to the great annoyance of their parents and the servants, but it was
of no avail. It was quite evident that his feelings were so wounded that he
would not appear. Mr. Otis consequently resumed his great work on the history
of the Democratic Party, on which he had been engaged for some years.